About IIT Jodhpur

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur was established in 2008, to foster technology education and research in India. The Institute is committed to technological thought and action to benefit the economic development of India. Scholarship in teaching and learning; Scholarship in research and creative accomplishments; and relevance to Industry are three driving forces for us at IIT Jodhpur.

IIT Jodhpur functions from its sprawling residential Permanent Campus of 852 acres on National Highway 65, north-northwest of Jodhpur towards Nagaur. This campus is meticulously planned and envisioned to stand as a symbol of academics – simple, but deep.

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur was established in 2008 to foster technology education and research in India. The Institute is committed to technological thought and action to benefit the economic development of the country. Scholarship in teaching and learning, scholarship in research and creative accomplishments, and relevance to industry are the three driving forces at IIT Jodhpur.

IIT Jodhpur functions from its sprawling residential permanent campus of 852 acres on National Highway 65, north-northwest of Jodhpur towards Nagaur. This campus is meticulously planned and envisioned to stand as a symbol of academics – simple yet profound.

The Institute is committed to a multidisciplinary approach to technology development. Hence, it has established state-of-the-art laboratories for basic research and has organised its academic degree programs through departments, while coordinating research activities through Centers for Technologies.

The Senate is a Statutory Body of the Institute and has control and general regulation, and is responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination in the Institute. The Senate periodically reviews the academic activities of the Institute from time to time.

Prof. Avinash Kumar Agarwal

Director

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Chairman

2	

Prof. Neeraj Gupta

Department of Architecture

Central University of Rajasthan

Member

3	

Prof. B. Bhattacharjee

Emeritus Professor

Department of Civil Engineering

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi

Member

4	

Sh. Ramesh Chand Jain

Additional Chief Engineer (Retd.)

JDVVNL, Jodhpur

Member

5	

Sh. Anil Kumar Jain

Special DG (Retd.), CPWD

Member

6	

Dr. Deepak Swami

Dean of Infrastructure Planning (DOIP)

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Member

7	

Sh. Anil Kumar Barnwal

Superintending Engineer

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Member

8	

Dr. Ankur Gupta

Offg. Registrar

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

The unique master plan of IIT Jodhpur conceptualizes the workings of all parts of the campus as an interlocking, integral network of complex dynamic systems, like the metabolism of a living organism.

This meta-system shall be actively studied and monitored (partly to generate intelligent control instructions and partly to mine data) and, in that sense, is a settlement evolving through trials and tests, a “Living Laboratory”.

The ideas for this “Smart Intelligent Eco-campus” encompass the ideals of social, economic, and environmental sustainability, and integrate aspects of landscape and biodiversity, food, water, and waste, solid waste, mobility, energy, and ICT to create an intricate life-like system of campus metabolism

Landscape

Berms act as signature bounding elements containing compact desert settlements. They mitigate noise, dust, and heat, and are part of the de-desertification strategy along with green buffer zones, green infrastructure, compact settlement patterns, and east-west streets.

This campus is a sustainable oasis in a challenging desert context, providing a protected habitat for flora and fauna (including humans). It rejuvenates the site by providing biodiversity corridors to allow native species to have contiguous habitat and passage across the site and within the region than being isolated in island sanctuaries in a human settlement.

The landscape plan aims at minimizing its water requirement by using recycled water. The campus uses hardy native species of plants, conserving water and improving soil moisture, while requiring little upkeep and easy disease management.

The landscape is designed to absorb stormwater even during extreme rainfall incidents and prevent erosion or flooding.

The landscape provides open space for interaction between students, faculty, local communities, artists, etc., and for art installations and public spaces, and also suitable green cover for parked vehicles.

Water

In this extremely water-scarce area, all the roof/ surface runoff is stored in cisterns. The campus can be made a zero water-demanding campus by storing all the runoff from areas on the ground in large cisterns so as not to merge with the saline aquifer (which cannot be tapped due to its being located in a distressed zone). Therefore, while a possibility, the targeted zero-water regime is proposed to be modified to create a very low water regime as below.

The water consumption of this campus is reduced notably with efficient fixtures, semi-automated irrigation systems, native plantation, extensive recycling and reuse of sewage, rainwater harvesting, storage and recharge, and encouraging a low water lifestyle.

Taking into account the treated water recharge for some seasons and increased rainwater recharge, this campus is a net-zero water campus. Over a period of years, as soil moisture improves and salinity of the aquifer reduces, the remainder white water needs may also be met by groundwater, thus making it an autonomous zero-water-demanding campus, provided groundwater extraction is allowed in the future.

The rainfall management system creates a very large storage capacity of roof runoff for water security.

Waste

This campus will create a zero solid waste regime by segregating waste at source and managing each stream appropriately so that the mixed waste for landfill is eliminated.

The campus will create positive value for recyclables such as paper, glass, reusable plastics and metals, isolates hazardous wastes (chemical or biological) for specialized disposal by certified recyclers, and stacks e-waste and the small quantity of mixed waste in stores for specialized disposal by progressively establishing the new Research Cluster for e-waste and mixed waste recycling and increasing this recycling capacity on site.

Energy

The energy consumption of this campus will be reduced notably with passive and traditional techniques of building integrated with renewable energy technologies, with compact building clustering, and by encouraging a low-energy lifestyle. The buildings shall be some of the most energy-efficient and low-resource-consuming buildings globally. Use of a double wall system with thermal insulation in between and at the rooftop shall reduce the heat load and reduce the energy consumption by ~20%

The spaces provide adaptive conditioned comfort for nearly all habitable areas while minimizing energy and reducing water.

Mobility

The campus segregates motorized, non-motorized vehicles (NMV), and pedestrian movement for a mobility system that provides safety, with better health and quality of life.

It demonstrates a compact development with access to all facilities within a 10-minute walk or cycling trip, and to non-motorized public transport, with adequate parking and external road connections for conventional vehicles.

Community Engagement

Traditional building techniques and skills are used to develop the structures. There is a provision for crafts and design workshops with the local community, training in modernized local building technologies, taking inspiration from traditional heritage and methods, with a fusion of traditional craft and material with futuristic systems. The Institute shall engage in interactive workshops for communicating intentions and outreach projects.

All the above features make this a near-zero emission campus, planned to provide flexible and phased expansion of all the relevant services.

Welcome to the Global Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN) Program

Global Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN) in higher education is a program of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) to invite accomplished scientists and entrepreneurs living abroad to give short courses at premier Institutes in India. This scheme is relevant especially for new IITs facing faculty shortage. The GIAN guidelines and the course format are given below:

The Institute invites Faculty Members of IIT Jodhpur to offer short courses.

Interested Faculty Members may contact:

Ananya Debnath

Nodal Officer, GIAN Program

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

The Office of Students acts as a link between students, student facilities, faculty and the administration of IIT Jodhpur. The sole motive of the Office is to create an atmosphere that promotes personal and academic development of students by organizing various activities and programs and providing them necessary support, thereby enhancing the overall student experience during their tenure at IIT Jodhpur. 

The Office is headed by the Associate Dean (Students) and its activities are coordinated by Assistant Registrar (Students), Superintendent (Students), Project Staff and Officers.

Scope

Since its inception, the Office of Students has been working extensively towards integration of activities by streamlining various processes. The core purviews of the Office of Students may be categorized under the following:- 

Administration : The Office corresponds with the Ministries/Government agencies regarding various scholarships, workshops, events, conferences etc; disbursal of Teaching Assistantship, conducting orientation program for new students, issuance of various certificates namely Bonafide certificate, No Objection Certificate, Character Certificate etc.

Academics : The Office has launched two non-graded credit courses on “Social Connect & Responsibility” and “Performing Arts” from the academic year 2019-2020. The aim of launching these courses is to help the incoming students to connect socially and explore their potential that will in turn shape their overall personality

Student Activities : Student Activities that form a major domain under the Office range from but are not limited to, Gymkhana Activities, Counseling Services, Alumni Relations and Placements and Internships.

Outreach Programs : Various outreach programs are organized by the Office with the aim of creating awareness about various Government/Private schemes that can be beneficial to the students. 

A few recent outreach programs to mention are; the CII workshop on Prime Minister's Fellowship for Doctoral Research and the visit & discussion with Mr. Naval Jit Kapoor, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs regarding scholarship schemes and grievance redressal.

Responsibilities

The responsibilities of Office of Students include the following:-

Disbursement of Teaching Assistantship, providing guidance for students regarding various state and national level scholarships, fee remissions for SC/ ST/EWS students.	 

Effectuating various workshops, non-graded courses etc.

Coordinating and supervising student gymkhana activities under 7 different societies.

Enthusing students to conduct and participate in cultural events. Rendering Support to students in organizing various festivals like IGNUS, Varchas, Nimble, Spandan and various other cultural/literary events like SPICMACAY programs.

Facilitating and overseeing Student Election process, and working with the Elected Students' Representatives on various issues concerning the students during their period of stay at IIT Jodhpur	 

Managing student hostels and mess/dining facilities, and other amenities within the campus

Guiding and preparing students for internships & placements. Organizing training programs to make the students employable and equip them with the skills essential to build a rewarding career for themselves.

Constantly working towards student's wellbeing through counseling services and helping them to achieve higher levels of maturity and motivation

UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES OF IITJ: CURRICULUM FOR A GLOBAL ENGINEER

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur is committed to educational excellence through a strong student-focused educational experience and to provide quality education with the contemporary and highly professional curricula. In order to achieve this objective, IIT Jodhpur has undergone thorough curriculum change in the year 2019 and came up with a new curriculum. This article highlights philosophy ingrained in the new curriculum and some salient features.
 

The societal challenges of the 21st century are profound and wide-ranging. Basic needs such as energy, food and water, housing, mobility, and health will become even more acute as the world population exceeds 9 billion. The demands for sustainable development will require redefined and innovative engineering talent and leadership. The emergence of a connected, competitive, and entrepreneurial global economy, in which successful engineers increasingly need technical competency and professional skills that differ from what worked in the past. These reasons build up a clear case for disruptive revision of the undergraduate curriculum.
 

Some of the attributes expected of modern engineers are:

 1.	 Flexibility to understand and manage rapidly evolving technologies;

 2. 	 Ability to identify, define as well as solve problems;

 3. 	 Proficiency in theory and applications;

 4. 	 Skill for handling out-of-the-box engineering challenges;

 5. 	 Capable of Creative Thinking;

 6. 	 Experience of entrepreneurship;

 7. 	 Understanding of public policy implications.
 	 

Today the creative function of engineering is expected to be viewed and understood in the broader context of the new patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities and social sciences, arts and engineering. IIT Jodhpur has pursued a newer structure of programmes in addition to classical programmes to address these opportunities.

Objectives

The objective of the new curriculum is to define a novel instructional paradigm and content plan to address modern demands of professional education (as outlined above) based upon the philosophy of outcome-based education. The curriculum builds on four guiding principles of outcome-based academic, i.e., 

 1.	 All students can learn and succeed but maybe not on the same day or in the same way  

 2.	 Each success by a student breeds more success (success must open up the opportunity of more success)

 3.	 Academic institutions create and nurture the conditions of success

 4.	 The academic system acknowledges and respects challenging initiatives without fear of failure.

 

Unique features of the UG curriculum

Unique features of the undergraduate curriculum are highlighted next:

The curriculum emphasized the fundamentals of basic and engineering sciences to enable learners to have a broader multi-disciplinary perspective for the specialisation being pursued. Departmental courses focus on fundamental scientific principles behind technologies.

Avenues created for pursuing co-curricular and extra-curricular creative interests as an integral component of the curricular content by introducing nongraded courses on social connect, performing arts, and communication skills. As an outcome of these pursuits, a student is expected to improve their capacity to imagine and to build up enthusiasm to pursue unknown territories through purely creative ventures.

Early design courses are introduced which focus more heavily on conceptual design methods and less on discipline-specific artefacts. These courses teach that design is open-ended; that there are numerous engineering challenges beyond domains of traditional disciplines, and that students could begin to think and work like engineers.

Avenues created for making students continuously engaged in these intellectual processes throughout the curriculum and at an increasingly sophisticated level through design credits. Such continual integrative experiences help students to expand and deepen their “internal knowledge structure” of the discipline, which will aid their eventual retrieval and use. 

Opportunities and challenges continue to require engineers to literally invent the future by developing breakthrough technologies that solve global problems and enhance the quality of life. Entrepreneurship education has been introduced in the curriculum as a minor which gives them solid experience in product design and development, prototyping, technology trends, and market analysis

Options of Department Area Specialisation and five-year B.Tech.+M.Tech. allows students to pursue in-depth study of the topics of interest belonging to the programme. Department Area Specialization in Engineering Innovation has also been introduced with the aim of making students Industry Ready by offering five months Practical Project jointly with an Industry or R & D organization. Students get real-world experience working for an industry or R & D organization on a project that complements their academic experience.

With the rapid change in the contours of engineering education due to emergence of Miniaturization, Parallelism, Smart Materials, Bio-mimetic Systems, AI and Cognitive Systems, the role of engineering institute is not only preparing students in their major areas of study but also on other skills to encourage interdisciplinary teams to address challenges faced by the society. The emphasis has been laid on the development of technical skills in interdisciplinary areas and upcoming fields by introducing various Interdisciplinary specializations such as AI, CPS, IoT, Robotics, Smart Healthcare, etc.

With evolving patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines and obliterating traditional boundaries between science and engineering, a capability linked Double B.Tech. with second degree in Engineering Science is introduced to pursue newer structures of programmes in addition to classical programmes to provide ability to apply diverse knowledge and skills flexibly in novel situations.

 With changing paradigms of Evaluation and Assessment, the performance of students in a course is evaluated not only thorough examinations but also on a continuous basis which include but not limited to interaction in the classroom interaction, quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects. Technology-enabled aids have been assimilated into continuation evaluation as an integrated component. 

The finer granularity in grading has been introduced to allow for more precise and fairer grading, provide a more reliable indication of student performance, and give students a better opportunity to improve their grades.

Throughout the curriculum Efforts have been laid down at building up Strong Foundation, Enabling Continuous Learning, Inter-disciplinary Breadth, Design Thinking, Imbibing Creative and Critical Thinking, Social Responsibility and Professional Ethics, and Sustainability as distinct thematic Commitment.

B. Tech in Bioengineering

Duration: 4 years

 

Introduction
 

Every life form, beginning from microscopic bacteria to multicellular organisms, can be considered as a system that has been perfected over millennia by Evolution. Beginning from thermodynamically efficient cellular processes to the molecular motors driving the bacterial flagella, each product of evolution is an optimized engineering design that can be translated into real-life applications across disciplines. Today’s interdisciplinary biology is well complemented by engineering domains including electronics, computer science, mechanics, and materials engineering.  Computational biology, for example, permits solving biology problems using statistical, artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches. Extensive use of computational biology is essential in data-driven approaches including Genomics, Proteomics, Transcriptomics, and Metabolomics. This amalgamation of biology and computer science has transformed the landscape of the infectious and non-infectious diseases research allowing the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. 

Today’s disease diagnosis is much more specific and sensitive, thanks to biosensors, which have far-reaching applications not only in healthcare but also in the environment, energy, and agriculture. Some applications include in-situ biosensors for human biochemical parameters, environmental contaminants, soil moisture, soil physicochemical parameters, etc. Advances in Biology have not only permitted the early diagnosis of disease but have also contributed abundantly to therapeutic interventions. It is now possible to intervene in diseases taking a multi-pronged approach, including the development of new drugs; production of recombinant therapeutics; development of implantable sensors, control systems; and editing genetic defects. Similarly, synthetic biology and genome editing tools have enabled the development of industrially important organisms for biofuel production as well as environmental remediation. Together, these technologies have significantly contributed to extending the healthy lifespan of the human race and have shown promise towards food, water, and energy security. In other words, bioengineering as a discipline has evolved to a great extent in last couple of decades and now demands a different intellectual outlook and scientific understanding for its further study.  Therefore, an undergraduate academic program in Bioengineering should reflect this rapid evolution of the discipline, underlying scientific and technological advancements and interdisciplinary cross-talk so as to capture the mind of the next generation.

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur is committed to achieving excellence in shaping the young minds of tomorrow with a unique blend of teaching techniques and hands-on research-based learning. The Institute works towards the holistic development of students allowing them to be able to assume leadership positions in Industry, Academia, and Entrepreneurial ventures. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering is committed to this goal and has developed academic programs that are interdisciplinary in nature and include a substantial component of courses from other science and engineering Departments. The Department aspires to produce Graduates, who can develop solutions to tackle local and global problems related to healthcare, energy, environment, water, and food.

 

Objectives of the program
 

The B. Tech. program in Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur aims to equip our graduates with in-depth knowledge and hands-on training in areas that will be relevant for the next decade. The curriculum attempts to deliver theoretical and practical content that will be needed to address societal needs that will challenge our Graduates globally as well as locally. This includes an unconventional and highly interdisciplinary approach towards problem-solving.

The key objectives of this program are:

(i) To provide a strong foundational understanding of the concepts in biology, engineering, mathematics, and allied sciences, enabling students to approach bioengineering problems through interdisciplinary lenses.

(ii) To stimulate the development of disruptive technologies and futuristic research in the domains of healthcare, energy, and the environment.

 

Expected graduate attributes
 

Graduates of the B. Tech program in Bioengineering will:

(i) be able to choose, design, develop and implement engineering solutions to solve technical problems in bioscience and bioengineering using trans-disciplinary knowledge and skill set.

(ii) be able to think out-of-the-box to solve critical challenges and be able to innovate novel technologies for affordable healthcare, clean energy, sustainable agriculture, and a safe environment.

(iii) be able to work effectively as a member and leader in a multi-disciplinary team.

(iv) have the requisite skills and knowledge to be bio-entrepreneurs.

(v) be able to effectively communicate biological/ bioengineering problems and solutions within the professional sphere and with the society at large.

(vi) be committed to high ethical standards in professional and social practices.

 

Learning outcomes
 

Graduates of the B. Tech program in Bioengineering will:

(i) Will have a comprehensive understanding of the essential concepts of bioscience and bioengineering encompassing cell and molecular biology, physiology, immunology, microbiology, genetics, genetic engineering, multi-omics, computational and systems biology.

(ii) Will gain trans-disciplinary knowledge and skillsets pertaining to biosensors, bioimaging, biomedical device development, biomaterials engineering, and drug discovery.

(iii) Will be able to design, develop, and implement technological solutions related to affordable healthcare, clean energy, sustainable agriculture, and a safe environment adopting a trans-disciplinary approach.

(iv) Will gain a strong understanding of the fundamentals of basic science, engineering, designing, computing and will get hands-on training on cutting edge technologies.

(v) Will be able to apply the knowledge of artificial intelligence and machine learning in solving complex biological problems.

(vi) Will learn to think critically to solve complex problems pertaining to bioscience and bioengineering.

(vii) Will develop communication skills (verbal and written) to communicate effectively in the professional and social sphere.

(viii) Will be committed to high ethical standards.

(ix) Will gain the knowledge and skills required to be an innovator-entrepreneur.

 

New skillsets targeted
 

 Ability to:

(i) design and develop AI-based technologies in healthcare, environment, and agriculture.

(ii) analyze the spatial complexity of living systems using imaging and image processing.

(iii) analyze and solve complex problems in the diverse fields of bioscience and bioengineering using omics and systems biology.

(iv) integrate multidisciplinary technologies for the development of lab-on-chip devices, biosensors, and other smart devices.

(v) integrate omics data to quantitative structure-activity relationship for drug discovery and development

(vi) design and develop smart biomaterials using micro- and nano-scale technologies

(vii) design novel strategies for tissue engineering application

(viii) design new therapeutic molecules in silico.

 

B.Tech in Bioengineering with Specialization

Duration: 4 years

 

The students will have the opportunity to choose the specializations while pursuing their regular B. Tech degree. The department is presently offering two specializations (listed below). The department specializations are designed to enable students to cater to the emerging industrial and societal challenges in various domains of Bioengineering. 

Therapeutic Engineering and Drug Discovery

Microbial Systems Engineering

The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering operates it's laboratory courses in fully equipped state-of-the-art teaching laboratories (205 & 206) in the basic laboratory building. These basic & advanced bioscience & bioengineering labs provide access to a host of equipment required for teaching bioscience & bioengineering at the undergraduate and post-graduate levels.

The biological world is full of natural wonders beginning from microscopic bacteria to multicellular organisms. Using a reductionist approach, each organism can be broken down into its subsystems, which continue to provide us with new knowledge on how evolution has perfected these systems over millennia. Conversely, one can also take a systems biology approach and appreciate the whole organism as a system that grows and continuously adapts to the environment. Beginning from thermodynamically efficient cellular systems to the molecular motors of the flagellar motor, each product of evolution is an optimized engineering design that can be translated into real-life applications across disciplines. 

Furthermore, the call for support from today’s data-driven biology has been answered by advancements in computational biology that permit solving biology problems using artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches. Genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, and metabolomics have transformed the landscape of infectious and non-infectious diseases allowing the development of new diagnostic measures as well as therapeutics. 

In combination with active contribution from Electronic, Mechanical, Materials engineering, implantable sensor, and support devices that are biocompatible have significantly contributed to extending the healthy lifespan of the human race. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering aspires to cater to the technological requirements of the country by conducting high-quality, translatable, and interdisciplinary research in the aforementioned focus areas.

 

Objectives of the program
 

To produce professionals with an in-depth knowledge of biological systems and phenomena, with critical thinking and bioengineering research skills that can be effectively put to use in solving problems in focus domains including Healthcare, Energy, Environment, and Agriculture. The program will help graduates to approach problems in the above focus domains by providing knowledge and hands-on laboratory training in the areas of data-driven multi-omics technologies, artificial intelligence & computational biology, systems biology, imaging-based diagnostics, biomaterials, and bio-therapeutics.

 

Expected graduate attributes
 

Graduates will

Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employment in biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, National research labs, and Academic institutions at the global level.

Develop a sense of ownership on the National missions for technology development, which will cater to societal needs such as affordable healthcare, clean energy, safe environment, and sustainable agriculture.

Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high-quality, reproducible research.

Be able to read, understand, and review intellectual property documents and recognize their rights.

Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written and spoken format.

Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological research, which are both necessary for high-quality research.

Develop healthy time management skills to plan and manage laboratory work as well as other miscellaneous research-associated demands on their time to effectively meet deadlines.
 

Learning outcomes
 

 Graduates will

Be introduced to cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research areas like Diagnostics & Therapeutics development, Instrumentation design & Development, Multi-omics Technologies & Applications, Biomedical Imaging& Image processing, Systems & Synthetic Biology, and Biomaterials Engineering, Artificial Intelligence for biological applications

Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable healthcare, clean energy, safe environment, and sustainable agriculture, allowing them to innovate and develop technological solutions for the same.

Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects that are designed to teach research methodology and common lab techniques.

Be introduced to Patents and other intellectual property documents, the rights that they grant, and necessary considerations while filing patents/technology that is protected by patents.

Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal clubs; manuscript writing, and research grant writing workshops.

Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups working towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and safety considerations while conducting biomedical research.

Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across the spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks.

The doctoral program at the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering (BSBE) permits students to undertake cutting edge research in the fields of Cellular & Molecular Neuroscience,  Bioimaging, Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Microbial physiology, Genomics, Environmental Biotechnology, Chemical Biology, Structural Biology, Protein Engineering, Centrosome Biology, Immunology, Statistical Genetics, Biomaterials Engineering, Tissue Engineering, Nanomedicine, and Drug Delivery. 

The doctoral program constitutes the major pillar of the department research in strengthening the journey towards technological solutions healthcare, water, food, and environment.  The department strongly encourages interdisciplinary research in the interface of Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, and Engineering.

 

Objectives of the program
 

The key objectives of the program are:

(i) To unravel the basic functioning of biological systems through cellular and Molecular Biology (Neuroscience).

(ii) To identify novel methods for early diagnosis, novel drugs, and personalized treatments.

(iii) Developing tools and algorithms for biological data management & Drawing epigenetic inferences through the statistical genetics approach.

(iv) To develop smart biomaterials and nanomaterials, nanotheranostics, drug delivery, tissue engineering, sensor platforms for applications in healthcare.

(v) To develop processes for bioenergy and bioremediation.

 

Expected graduate attributes
 

Graduates will

(i) Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employment in biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, national research labs, and academic institutions at the global level.

(ii) Develop a sense of ownership on the national missions for technology development, which will cater to societal needs in the area of healthcare, energy, food, environment.

(iii) Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high-quality, reproducible research.

(iv) Be able to read, understand, and review intellectual property documents and recognize their rights.

(v) Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written and spoken format.

(vi) Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological research, which are both necessary for high-quality research.

(vii) Develop healthy time management skills to plan and manage laboratory work as well as other miscellaneous research-associated demands on their time to effectively meet deadlines.

 

Learning outcomes
 

Graduates will

(i) Be introduced to cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research areas like cellular and Molecular Neuroscience, Novel drug development, Bio-Imaging, Systems & Synthetic Biology, Bioelectrochemical systems, bioenergy systems, and Biomaterials Engineering, Nanomedicine, protein engineering, Chemical Biology, Microbiology, Structural Biology.

(ii) Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable healthcare/energy/water/environment.

(iii) Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects that are designed to teach research methodology and common lab techniques.

(iv) Be introduced to Patents and other intellectual property documents, the rights that they grant, and necessary considerations while filing patents/technology that is protected by patents.

(v) Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal clubs; manuscript writing, and research grant writing workshops.

(vi) Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups working towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and safety considerations while conducting biomedical research.

(vii) Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across the spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks.

Regulations governing Programs offered by the Institute for students

1. 	Regulations for Students enrolled from July 2019 onwards  ( Download file: 536 KB)

 	1.1 Amendment –  Revised Norms for Continuation of Program/Assistantship and graduation requirements for M.Tech./M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D. students registered from 2019 onwards  ( Download file: 536 KB)

2.	

Regulations for Students enrolled from July 2020 onwards  ( Download file: 536 KB)

2.1 Amendment –  Revised Norms for Continuation of Program/Assistantship and graduation requirements for M.Tech./M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D. students registered from 2019 onwards  ( Download file: 280 KB)

3.	

Regulations for Students enrolled from July 2021 onwards  ( Download file: 536 KB)

3.1 Amendment –  Revised Norms for Continuation of Program/Assistantship and graduation requirements for M.Tech./M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D. students registered from 2019 onwards  ( Download file: 280 KB)

4.	

Regulations for Students enrolled from July 2022 onwards  ( Download file: 441 KB)  (Post Graduate Programmes)

5.	

Regulations for Joint Programmes in Medical Technologies

6.	M.S. by Research Regulations for Students enrolled from July 2023 onwards  ( Download file)

7.	

Amendments applicable for all students from Semester I Academic Year 2024-25 

1. Amendment in the Attendance Policy of the Institute   ( Download file)

2. Amendment in the Examination Policy of the Institute  ( Download file)

Rules & Regulations (For Students enrolled from July 2019 onwards)  ( Download file)

Amendment – Revised Norms for Continuation of Program/Assistantship and graduation requirements for M.Tech./M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D. students registered from 2019 onwards  ( Download file)

Academic Regulations

Approved in July 2019

Academic Regulations

Academic Regulations

2. Academic Session
 

2.1 Academic Calendar

3. Registration
 

3.1 Provisional Registration

3.2 Late Registration

3.3 Adding and Dropping of Courses

3.4 Withdrawing from a course

3.5 Cancellation of Semester Registration

3.6 Summer Course Registration

4. Teaching and Evaluation
  

4.1 Teaching

4.1.1 Medium of Instruction

4.1.2 Course Structure

4.1.3 Approval of Courses

4.1.4 List of Courses

4.1.5 Categories of Courses

4.1.6 Conduct of Courses

4.1.7 Teaching Assignments

4.1.8 Auditing of Courses

4.1.9 Attendance Requirements

4.2 Evaluation

5. Grading System
  

5.1 Letter Grades

5.2 Procedure for declaration of results

5.3 Grade Point Averages
 

5.3.1 Semester Grade Point Average

5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average

6. Grade Card and Transcript

7. Waiver of Requirements in Special Cases

8. Make-up Examinations

Regulations for Undergraduate Programmes

 

Regulations for Undergraduate Programmes

9. Undergraduate Programs

10. Undergraduate Admissions
  

10.1 B.Tech. Programmes

10.2 Reservation Policy

10.3 Student Exchange Programme

10.4 Visiting Students

10.5 Cancellation of Admission

10.6 Fulfillment of Admission Requirements

11. Curriculum and Academic Requirements
 

11.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for UG Programmes

11.2 Capability Linked Opportunities for Undergraduate Students

11.3 Course Categories and Academic requirements for various programmes

11.4 Maximum Duration of the Program

11.5 Academic Performance Requirements

11.6 Assistantship for B.Tech. -M. Tech. Dual-degree Programmes

12. UG Registration
  

12.1 Summer Courses

12.2 Limits on Registration

12.3 Exceptions to Regular Rules regarding Academic Load

12.4 Change of Registration from B. Tech. Programme to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree Programme

13. Evaluation of Special UG only courses
  

13.1 B.Tech. Project Evaluation

13.2 Composition of Department Undergraduate Committee (DUGC)

13.3 Engineering Innovation

13.4 Design Project Evaluation

13.5 Conduct and Evaluation of B.Tech. -M. Tech Dual Degree Project

13.6 Entrepreneurship Project

14. Termination
  

14.1 Termination from B.Tech. Program

14.2 Appeal against Termination

15. Leave Rules
  

15.1 Mid-Semester Recess and Vacation

15.2 Short Leave

15.3 Semester Withdrawal

15.4 Academic Leave

16. Branch Change

17. Requirements
  

17.1 Minimum Duration of Residence

17.2 Academic

17.3 Payment of Fees and Dues

17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action

17.5 Completion of engagement in NCC, NSS or NSO

17.6 Award of Degrees

18. Amendments

Regulations for Postgraduate Programmes

 

Regulations for Postgraduate Programmes

19. Postgraduate Programmes

20. Postgraduate admissions
 

 

20.1 Categories of Admission

20.2 Eligibility for Admission

20.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students

20.4 Reservation Policy

21 PG Registration
  

21.1 Limits on Registration

21.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree Programme

21.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. Program

21.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. Programme

21.5 Maximum Duration of a Program

21.6 Course Registration

22 Academic Requirements
  

22.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programme

22.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes

22.3 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. Students

22.4 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. Students/ Executive M.Tech.

22.5 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. – M.Tech. Dual Degree

22.6 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree

22.7 Academic Credit Requirements for Ph.D. Students

22.8 Academic Performance Requirements

23. Leave Rules
  

23.1 Leave

23.2 Other Leaves

23.3 Semester Withdrawa

23.4 Academic Leave

24. Financial Assistance
  

24.1 M.Sc. Program

24.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program

24.3 M.Tech. Program

24.4 Executive M Tech Program

24.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program

24.6 Ph.D. Program

25. Rules and Regulations For M.Tech./M.Sc._Project

26 Rules and Regulations for Ph.D./M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
  

26.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)

26.2 Change of Research Supervisor

26.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)

26.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)

26.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student

26.6. Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree

26.7 Relaxation in M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program

26.8 Cancellation of Registration

26.9 Synopsis

26.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation

27. Graduation Requirements
  

27.1 Minimum Residential Requirement

27.2 Academic

27.3 No Dues Clearance

27.4 No case of Disciplinary Action

27.5 Award of Degrees

28. AMENDMENTS

Academic Regulations
[Back to index]

1. Introduction
[Back to index]

Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop thehighest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledgecreation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities,social sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would beable to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such asenergy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientificknowledge, IIT Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness,humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular andextra-curricular activities on campus.

The undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life longprocess of learning, creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmesfocus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creativeinquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objectiveMind.

The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) CreditSystem and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a dulyconstituted Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chairedby Dean (Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics-PG)/Associate Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).

The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a highstandard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Withinthis broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes caninclude additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. Theseacademic programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriatemodifications/ improvements as and when necessary.

2. Academic Session
[Back to index]

The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer term as per the following timelines:

Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November

Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April

Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.

Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at least 70.

2.1 Academic Calendar
[Back to index]

The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation, declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the Senate.

3. Registration
[Back to index]

Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late registration.

3.1 Provisional Registration

A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be regularized.

3.2 Late Registration

If the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against deregistration may be made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. Chairman Senate may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.

3.3 Adding and Dropping of Courses

A student may add or drop course(s) with approval ofthe Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.

3.4 Withdrawing from a Course

After the last date of add-drop, a student will have theoption of withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically withinfour weeks from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. Thewithdrawn course will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.

3.5 Cancellation of Semester Registration

Absence for a period of four or more weeksDuring a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from allthe courses in that semester.

3.6 Summer Course Registration
​A department may offer summer courses to enable thestudents to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run duringsummer provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offeredon approval of the Dean.

4. Teaching and Evaluation
[Back to index]

4.1 Teaching
[Back to index]

4.1.1 Medium of Instruction

The medium of instruction is English.

All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course is based on the number of contact hours for lectures, tutorials, and practicals A student on successful completion of the course with a passing grade will earn equivalent number of credits. Based on required academic maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can consist of independent components which can be completed independently. These components are called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all parameters related to course numbering scheme.

Table 4.1 Course Code Description

Course Code	M	E	L	1	X	X	1

Descriptions	Offering Department/IDRP	Course Type	Level of Courses	Unique Identification Number	Indicates Fractal

Categories	See Table 4.2	See Table 4.3	See Table 4.4	This code will be given centrally by the office of academics	0: Regular, 1: Fractal-1, 2: Fractal-2, 3: Fractal-3

Note: Examples of course codes

 	Course Title	L-T-P	Course Code

Regular Course	Engineering Mechanics	2-1-0	MEL1XX0

Fractal Course	Robotics	3-0-2	MEL7XX0

Fractal 1: Robot Modelling	1-0-0	MEL7XX1

Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming	MEL7XX2

Fractal 3: Robot Control	MEL7XX3

Table 4.2 Departmental Code

S. N.	Type	Department/Platform/Office

Department

1	ME	Mechanical Engineering

2	CS	Computer Science and Engineering

3	EE	Electrical Engineering

4	CI	Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

5	CH	Chemical Engineering

6	BB	Bioscience and Bioengineering

7	MT	Metallurgical & Materials Engineering

8	CY	Chemistry

9	MA	Mathematics

10	PH	Physics

11	HS	Humanities and Social Science

Interdisciplinary Research Platforms (IDRPs)

12	DH	Digital Humanities

13	SS	Space Science and Technology

14	IO	Internet of Things and Applications

15	AV	Autonomous unmanned vehicles (AUV)

16	QC	Quantum Information and Computation

17	CG	Cognitive Science

18	SH	Smart Healthcare

Others

19	OA	Office of Academics

20	OS	Office of Students

Table 4.3 Types of Courses

S. N.	Course Type	Category

1	L	Lecture courses (other than lecture hours, these courses can have Tutorial and Practical hours, e.g. L-T-P Structures 3-0-0, 3-1-2, 3-0-2, 2-0-0, etc.)

2	P	Practical / Practice based courses (where performance is evaluated primarily on the basis of practice, practical or laboratory work with LTP structures such as 0-0-3, 0-0-4, 1-0-3, 0-1-3, etc.)

3	D	Project based courses (e.g. Major, Minor, Mini Projects)

4	N	Non-graded core component

5	T	Thesis

6	Q	Seminar Courses

7	S	Independent Study

8	R	Product Realization

9	E	Engineering Design (Graded and Non-Graded)

Table 4.4 Level of Courses, category and credit requirements

S. N.	Level	Category	Credit Requirements

1	100.0	Courses for B.Tech. Programmes	B.Tech. (Cr>=0)

2	200.0

3	300.0	B.Tech. (Cr>=38)

4	400.0	B.Tech. (Cr>=75)

5	500.0	Preparatory Courses of M.Sc. and M.Tech. Programmes (NOT open to B.Tech. and B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree)	M.Tech. (Cr=0)M. Sc. (Cr=0)

6	600.0	Courses for M.Sc. programmes	B.Tech. (Cr>=75)M.Sc. (Cr>=0)M.Tech. (Cr >= 0)

7	700.0	Courses for M.Tech. programmes	B.Tech. (Cr>=100)M.Sc. (Cr >=30)M.Tech. (Cr>=0)Ph.D. (Cr>=0)

Advanced courses for M.Sc.

8	800.0	Advanced courses for M.Tech. and Ph.D. programmes, An 800 level course should have 700 level course as a pre-requisite	M.Tech. (Cr>=14) Ph.D. (Cr>=0)

4.1.3 Approval of Courses

The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved courses may be offered during any semester/summer term.

4.1.4 List of Courses

The list of courses to be offered in a Program is finalized before the beginning of the semester, by the Department hosting that Program.

4.1.5 Categories of Courses

Courses offered can be from one of the following categories:

Regular Course: A regular course has 14 hours of class room engagement per one credit. A regular course can be under elective or core/compulsory categories.Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students register for the course. A 700 or 800 level elective course can run with a minimum of 5 registered students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study course as per the following section.

Self Study Course A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by Senate. The main features of a self-study course are as follows:A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.

A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.

Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program committee. The final sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the course.The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award of letter grade at the end of the semester.A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.

Independent Study Course Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interestunder the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involvingan Instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-disciplined and having a senseof own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. Astudent having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for Independent Study courses with therecommendation of Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study courseare as follows:

A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-studycourse not exceeding 3 credits in self-study mode at most once during the program.Such independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of theprogram and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript.

Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriaterecommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/IRC. The final sanction of anindependent-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).

Normally, no formal lectures will be held for an Independent Study course butlaboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integralpart of the course.

4.1.6 Conduct of Courses

Each course is conducted by the Instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors, as needed. The Instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per Subsection 5.2.

A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face to face physical interaction with the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students to be concurrently connected to the class-room interaction via electronic conferencing involving both audio and video communication. 

However, there has to be direct interaction between faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up study of an approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. 

This mode can be also adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the senate, under supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation component applicable to courses being run through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical supervision of a faculty. All laboratory component of a course requiring use of specialized facility will be conducted through direct contact.

The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the Instructor(s) concerned. The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.

4.1.7 Teaching Assignments

The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in consultation with the Head of that Department.

4.1.8 Auditing of Courses

A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the permission of the Instructor of the course being audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade Card of the student.

4.1.9 Attendance Requirements

A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless the student takes leave of absence for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. The attendance records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the student’s attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. Students not meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade to pass a course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower than the cut-off for C grade in a course.

4.2 Evaluation
[Back to index]

The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers and projects.

The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each subject in each semester.Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. 

Fractal courses (less than 3 credits) must have at least one examination.The total weightage of examination component (three examinations for a 14 week long course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom, quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.

5. Grading System
[Back to index]

5.1 Letter Grades
[Back to index]

5.1 Letter Grades

At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each course. Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in Table 5.1. 

In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand for Incomplete, Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty member shall upload grade on the portal as per the stipulated time schedule.

Table 5.1 Letter grade and its equivalent grade points

S.N.	Letter Grade	Grade Points	Comment

1	A*	10	Exceptional

2	A	10	Outstanding

3	A-	9	Excellent

4	B	8	Very Good

5	B-	7	Good

6	C	6	Average

7	C-	5	Below Average

8	D	4	Marginal

9	E	2	Poor

10	F	0	Fail

11	I	Incomplete

12	S	Satisfactory in Course

13	X	Thesis Continuation

14	U	Unsatisfactory

15	W	Withdrawn

A detailed description of some of the grades is given below:

S.N.	Grades	Description

1	A*	‘A*’ grade has the same grade point as ‘A’ grade. The grade ‘A*’ indicates exceptional performance and is awarded only in the Course/(s) in which the number of registered students is more than 50. It should not exceed 2 % of the total strength of the particular theory or lab course. The grade ‘A*’ is not awarded for projects /seminars.

2	E	‘E’ Grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the cutoff marks for ‘D’ Grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute. Students who obtain an ‘E’ Grade will be eligible to appear in an additional examination. If they perform satisfactorily, they become eligible for getting the ‘E’ grade converted to a ‘D’ Grade, otherwise, they will continue to have ‘E’ Grade. The student will have only one chance to appear for the additional examination for an ‘E’ Grade. The additional examination will be conducted within the first week of the next semester. The date of additional examination of Institute core courses for undergraduate students centrally notified, while for all other courses, the date would be announced by the respective course coordinators. A student can appear for a maximum of three such additional tests in a given semester. If a student cannot appear for the test due to any reason(s), he/she will not get any additional chance. If a student with ‘E’ grade in a course does not pass the course through the additional test, or obtains an ‘F’ grade in the course, he/she has to repeat the course if it is a core course. In case the course is an elective, the student may take the same course again or any other course. ‘E’ and ‘F’ Grades are not counted in the calculation of the CGPA; however, these are taken into account in the calculation of the SGPA.

3	I	An ‘I’ grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his/her request to denote incomplete performance in a course on approval of instructor. An ‘I’ grade is awarded in case missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical grounds or other special circumstances. Requests for ‘I’ grade should be made at the earliest but not later than the last day of major tests. All evaluation requirements for such students in the corresponding course(s) should be completed before the end of the first week of the next semester. Upon completion of all course requirements, the ‘I’ grade is converted to a regular grade.

4	S	This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded and Audit courses. If the stipulated requirements are not fulfilled, the unsatisfactory (U) grade is awarded. The grades obtained in an audit course are not considered in the calculation of SGPA or CGPA.

5	X	This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in thesis for continuation

6	U	This grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis, audit or non-graded courses.

7	W	This grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course. Withdrawal from a course is permitted until the date specified in the Academics Calendar.

5.2 Procedure for declaration of results
[Back to index]

The following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and time line would be as per Academic Calendar.Evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester:Display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors.

Finalization of grades by instructorsGrade moderation by department/institute level committee for department/institute wide coursesRecommendation of grades by the Head of the Department after scrutiny of grades by a moderation committeeDisplay of grades by InstructorsGrade correction, if any, within 48 hours of display of grades after approval of the head of the departmentApproval of Grade by the Dean (UG/PG)/Associate Dean(UG/PGs)Finalization of results by the Dean (UG/PG)/Associate Dean(UG/PG)Approval of results by the Chairman SenateResults once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. In exceptional cases, the Student may appeal to the Chairman, Senate for reconsideration, with formal justification.

5.3 Grade Point Averages
[Back to index]

5.3.1 Semester Grade Point Average

The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average of the grades earned by a student in all the courses credited by her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the respective semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student in N courses registered during a semester are G1, G2, … GN, and the corresponding credits C1, C2, … CN, then the SGPA is given by the following formula:

The SGPA is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and courses in which S/X grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester.

5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average

The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall academic performance of a student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. The CGPA is computed similarly as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters. The CGPA is calculated on the basis of all pass grades (A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D), except audit courses and courses in which S/X grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters.

The SGPA and CGPA calculation is based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone.

6. Grade Card and Transcript
[Back to index]

A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at the end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.

7. Waiver of Requirements in Special Cases
[Back to index]

The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.

8. Make-up Examinations
[Back to index]

A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The student should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor within ten days from the date of the examination missed, explaining the reasons for their absence. 

Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take a make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the following categories:

Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted in the Hospital during the period of the missed quiz/exam.Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital before they proceed for such consultation.

Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital.

A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a medical certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly endorsed by the parent/guardian.

A slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup / supplementary week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take the make-up examination. 

A student who misses this make-up examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. However, in exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in consultation with the Dean of Academics may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. Under no circumstances prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance.

Regulations for Undergraduate Programmes
[Back to index]

9. Undergraduate Programs
[Back to index]

IIT Jodhpur currently offers Bachelor of Technology (B. Tech.) programs, and capability linked opportunities for undergraduate students through Minor/Interdisciplinary Area Specialization leading to M.Tech. in Minor/Interdisciplinary Area, Department Area Specialization leading to M.Tech. in Department Area, Minor in Entrepreneurship leading to M.Tech. in Entrepreneurship and Department Area Specialization in Product Realization (through Industrial Translation).

10. Undergraduate Admissions
[Back to index]

10.1 B.Tech. Programmes
[Back to index] 10.1.1 General Admissions

Admissions to the B.Tech. Programmes are made once a year in July through the all-India level Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) conducted by IITs. The procedures and other requirements for admission are specified in the JEE Information Brochure brought out every year.

10.1.2 Cultural Exchange Programmes

Admissions are also offered to foreign nationals under the Cultural Exchange Fellowship Program of the Government of India, administered by Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR), New Delhi. Persons interested in these Programs are required to apply through the Indian High Commission/Embassy in their respective countries.

10.1.3 Change/Enhancement of Program

A student already admitted to a B.Tech. programme may switch to another department through branch change. A student can enhance his/her programme to a Minor/Interdisciplinary Area Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Minor/Interdisciplinary Area, Major/Department Area Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Department Area, Minor in Entrepreneurship, Minor in Entrepreneurship leading to M. Tech. in Entrepreneurship and Department Area Specialization in Product Realization (through Industrial Translation). The rules governing these changes are given in Section 18 (branch change) and Section 11.2 (for all others).

10.2 Reservation Policy
[Back to index]

The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.

10.3 Student Exchange Programme
[Back to index]

Student Exchange Program provides for a one/two-semester visit by students between the two academic institutions on a reciprocal basis. The visiting student must be a full-time student enrolled in a degree program in their Home Institution. The exchange program is open to full-time undergraduate and graduate students of each Home Institution. It will be executed as per the pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU) between the institutions.

Selection of students under such program will be made by the DUGC after assessing the preparedness of students to meet the requirements of the planned coursework/research at the Host Institution and the relevance of the planned coursework/research to the enrolled degree program. 

A visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities as per pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU).

Under exchange program, a student of IIT Jodhpur can register at another academic institution in India or abroad with the expectation of credit transfer up to 20 credits per semester in lieu of the course work or research work through a pre-approved arrangement including an MoU.

On return, the student may apply to DUGC for waiver of credits from her/his program requirements which s/he thinks are equivalent to the courses successfully completed at the visited academic institution as an exchange student. With the application, the student must submit an official transcript of the grades obtained by her/him at the visited academic institution as an exchange student and other documents/material that the concerned DUGC may require for evaluation. 

The DUGC will determine, by whatever means it deems fit, the equivalent credits requirements for which the student may be given a waiver in her/his programme at IIT Jodhpur. DUGC will submit its recommendations to course equivalence committee for its approval. Moreover,

The credits/grades indicated in the grade sheet obtained from the academic institution in which the student has completed the courses should be used by the student as part of his/her transcripts.

IIT Jodhpur transcripts will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester.

The CGPA calculation based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone is to be considered for award of prizes.

Academic Regulations

10.4 Visiting Students
[Back to index]

A visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in India or abroad, and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities.

A person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the Dean (Academics). A visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. A visiting student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status, Program, and nationality.

Students so admitted also will be governed by all rules, regulations, and discipline applicable to regular students of the Institute.

10.5 Cancellation of Admission
[Back to index]

Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any Program shall submit copies of their mark sheets, provisional certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the last date specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. 

The Senate reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student, who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s). Also, the Senate reserves the right to cancel the admission at any later time, if it is found that the student had provided some false information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission.

10.6 Fulfillment of Admission Requirements
[Back to index]

Admission to any undergraduate Program requires that the applicant be eligible, go through the laid-down admission procedure, and pay the prescribed fees. The Senate should formally approve all admissions to the Undergraduate Programmes.

11. Curriculum and Academic Requirements
[Back to index]

11.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for UG Programmes
[Back to index]

The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 11.1. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spend by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

Table 11.1 LTP-structure and credit assignment.

Type	L-T-P	Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours	Total Credits (TC=TH/3)

Contact Hours (CH)	Beyond ContactHours (BCH)	TotalHours(TH)

1 hour of Lecture	1-0-0	1	2	3	1

1 hour of Tutorial	0-1-0	1	2	3	1

1 hour of Lab	0-0-1	0.5	1.5	0.5	0.5

1 hour of Project#	0-0-1	1	2	3	1

11.2 Capability Linked Opportunities for Undergraduate Students
[Back to index]

Major/Department Specialization

Interdisciplinary Specialization

Minor

B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree

11.2.1 Eligibility Criteria for opting

(a) Major/Department Specialization, Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization

A student should have earned minimum 100 credits with the CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 at the end on 6th semester to opt for capability linked opportunity.

(b) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree in chosen specialization

Students who have already opted for Major/Department Specialization, Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization can opt for dual-degree Programme from the eighth semester provided they have earned minimum 134 Credits with at least 6 CGPA at the end of the 7th semester.

11.2.2 Minimum Credit requirements

(a) Major/Department Specialization, Interdisciplinary Specialization and Minor

A student needs to complete a total of 20 Credits in the Major/Department Specialization or Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization area offered. 10 Credits out of 20 can be taken up as a part of Open electives whereas the student is required to opt for an additional 10 credits in the form of course overload. This will be indicated on the degree.

Registration for Additional Courses for Major/Department Specialization, Interdisciplinary Specialization and Minor Starting from the sixth semester, students having earned 80 credits with CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 are permitted to take up to 4 extra Credits as part of their normal load, which forms part of her/his additional learning component, every semester in addition to the prescribed courses for their degree.

(b) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree in chosen specialization

A student needs to complete a total of 56 Credits in the Minor, Department, or Interdisciplinary area offered. It will include credits earned for Major/Department or Minor/ Interdisciplinary area Specialization excluding the project credits.

11.3 Course Categories and Academic requirements for various programmes
[Back to index]

Course Categories and Academic requirements for various programmes are given in the table below:

Course Categories and Academic requirements

Table 11.3 Course Categories and Academic requirements

S.N.	Course Type	Course Category	B.Tech.Regular	B.Tech.with Specialization	Dual Degree

1	Institute Core (I)	Engineering (IE)	34.0	34.0	34.0

Science (IS)	16.0	16.0	16.0

Humanities (IH)	12.0	12.0	12.0

2	Programme Linked (L)	Science (LS)	7.0	7.0	7.0

3	Programme Core (P)	Programme Compulsory (PC)	50.0	50.0	50.0

Programme Electives (PE)	18.0	18.0	18.0

B.Tech. Project (PP)	3.0	3.0	3.0

4	Open (O)	Electives (OE)	10.0	0.0	0.0

5	Specialization (Major/Minor/Department/Interdisciplinary) (S)	Compulsory (SC)	0.0	8.0	8.0

Elective (SE)	0.0	12.0	12#

6	M.Tech. (M) in Minor, Department, or Interdisciplinary Area	Compulsory (MC)	0.0	0.0	9

Electives (ME)	0.0	0.0	5

Project (MP)	0.0	0.0	16

Open Electives (MO)	0.0	0.0	6

Total Graded	150.0	160.0	196

7	Non-Graded (N)	Humanities (NH)	6.0	6.0	6.0

Engineering (NE)	3.0	3.0	3.0

Design/Practical Experience (ND)	6.0	6.0	6.0

 	165.0	175.0	211

# Must not include any project course

11.4 Maximum Duration of the Program
[Back to index]

The maximum duration for the completion B.Tech. Programs shall be 14 registered semesters.

11.5 Academic Performance Requirements
[Back to index]

The minimum requirements on credits earned for continuation in a B. Tech. Programme at the end of the second registered semester is specified in the following table:

Criteria for continuation at the end of the second registered semester

Description	Minimum number of credits to be earned

GEN/OBC/GEN-EWS	SC/ST/PD

Minimum for Continuation	18	14

If a student does not meet the criterion specified in Table 11.3, he/she may opt to restart the programme or else their registration will be terminated. The restart will be permitted only once.

If a student chooses to restart after the first two registered semesters, then the credits earned and semesters registered till that point will not be counted towards the graduation requirements. The re-start will be indicated on the transcript.

11.6 Assistantship for B.Tech. -M. Tech. Dual-degree Programmes
[Back to index]

The students of dual-degree programmes will be considered for award of institute research/ teaching assistantship if they have earned 150 credits by the end of the eighth semester. 

Only those students who have either qualified GATE or have a CGPA more than 8.0 will be eligible for this assistantship. The assistantship will be provided for a maximum period of 14 months beginning from the summer semester following the eighth semester, provided the student is registered for M.Tech. Major Project in that semester. 

A student availing assistantship will be required to provide 8 hours of assistance per week besides his/ her normal academic work. For continuation of assistantship, a student will need to secure SGPA of 6.5.

A student receiving assistantship will be eligible for a total of 30 days leave during the 14-month period. He/she will not be entitled to mid-semester breaks, winter and summer vacations.

12. UG Registration
[Back to index]

12.1 Summer Courses
[Back to index]

Students can register for courses during summer up to a maximum of Eight Credits on payment of registration fee at prescribed rates. The summer term is not a regular semester and only academically deficient students (who have low CGPA and/or fewer credits than advised by the curriculum till that point in the programme), Major students, Minor students, and such students who are short of maximum Eight Credits to complete all graduation requirements may register during this period.

For core courses, only students with failed backlog may be considered for summer registration. In case any vacancies are left in the courses being offered during the summer term once the requirements of the above categories of students are fulfilled, other students may register for these courses to fulfil some of their graduation requirements in advance.

The total number of contact hours for the courses remains the same as that during the regular semesters, and therefore the courses run at an accelerated pace. The evaluation and grading patterns also remain the same as during the regular semesters.

12.2 Limits on Registration
[Back to index]

An undergraduate student should register for a minimum of 12 credits in a semester.The maximum number of credits permitted for a UG student in a semester is 25.An undergraduate student may be permitted to register for a maximum of four credits per semester for independent-study or self-study course

12.3 Exceptions to Regular Rules regarding Academic Load
[Back to index]

Under-load: Students who are identified as academically deficient (on academic probation) may register for a maximum of 16 credits.

Over-load: Overloading may be allowed only for students who are not on academic probation and satisfy one of the following criteria: Students are allowed to overload only when they need 70 or less additional credits to complete all the requirements of their programme. Beyond the second semester, any student with a CGPA of 7.5 or higher may be allowed to overload.

12.4 Change of Registration from B. Tech. Programme to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree Programme
[Back to index]

A B.Tech. Student having opted for major/minor specialization with CGPA 6 or more at the end of the seventh semester and fulfilling requirements mentioned earlier may be allowed to switch to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the eighth semester. The M.Tech degree can be any one of the approved programmes of the institute. All requirements of M.Tech. Degree will be applicable to all such students. All such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.

13. Evaluation of Special UG only courses
[Back to index]

13.1 B.Tech. Project Evaluation
[Back to index]

DUGC will appoint a committee for B.Tech. Project evaluation. The committee will ensure that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.

The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project.DUGC will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students.

The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project

DUGC will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students

13.2 Composition of Department Undergraduate Committee (DUGC)
[Back to index]

The DUGC will be constituted of all UG Faculty Advisors and Head of Department. The Head of Department will be the chairperson and one of the faculty advisors would be the convenor.

13.3 Engineering Innovation
[Back to index]

At the completion of an Engineering Innovation Project the student will submit a reportwhich will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project/

The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project/Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded.

Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day ofthe class.

13.4 Design Project Evaluation
[Back to index]

At the completion of a project, the student will submit a project report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project and S or U grade is awarded.

Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of the class.

13.5 Conduct and Evaluation of B.Tech. -M. Tech Dual Degree Project
[Back to index]

Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor(s).The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth semester.Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).The evaluation criterion would be same as Section 25.

The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth semester

Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).

The evaluation criterion would be the same as Section 25.

13.6 Entrepreneurship Project
[Back to index]

At the completion of Entrepreneurship, the student will submit a report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by Dean (Academics-UG)/Associate Dean (Academics-UG).

The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded.

14. Termination
[Back to index]

14.1 Termination from B.Tech. Program
[Back to index]

A student may be terminated from the B.Tech. Programme by AC, if the student

(a) Is absent without authorized leave of absence for eight weeks or more in a semester; OR
(b) Fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a bonafide reason; OR
(c) Violates the code of conduct, involves in ragging, etc. as confirmed by a Committee constituted for the purpose; OR
(d) Does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within the maximum duration of the program; OR
(e) Is on academic probation for two consecutive semesters.

14.2 Appeal against Termination

[Back to index]

A student, who is terminated from the B.Tech. Program can appeal to the Chairman, Senate, for reconsideration. While making such an appeal, the student is expected to give reasons for poor academic performance and/or why the termination should be reconsidered. 

The Senate shall take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. But, the Senate will not entertain any further appeal for review, unless substantial additional information is brought to its notice.

15. Leave Rules
[Back to index]

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DUGC, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the DUGC.

15.1 Mid-Semester Recess and Vacation
[Back to index]

Undergraduate students are entitled to avail of mid-semester recess and vacation as specified in the Academic Calendar.

15.2 Short Leave
[Back to index]

A student may be granted leave of absence during the semester for a maximum of 10 days on medical grounds, and for 5 days for any other valid reason.

15.3 Semester Withdrawal
[Back to index]

It may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. 

DUGC can approve and intimate Office of Academics regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student.

15.4 Academic Leave
[Back to index]

To help students broaden their horizons and gain course/work experience, she/he may be permitted to proceed to other academic institutes/ Industry/ R&D organization in India or abroad. Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as

Fieldwork

Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ

Entrepreneurship initiative

Product realization through industrial translation

Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with an academic institution in India or abroad

Internship work

All such requests must be evaluated and approved by DUGC before the leave is granted.A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one summer term and two semesters on academic leave.A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 20 credits per semester as certified by the DUGC and approved by the Course Equivalence Committee.

16. Branch Change
[Back to index]

The branch change of the student in another branch and engineering science is permitted after the completion of the 1st year after completing all academic requirements of the credits including non-graded courses. The eligibility criteria of the branch change is as follows:

E1: The student must have completed all prescribed course credits for the previous semesters (including the non-graded courses).

E2: The student has no backlog.

E3: No disciplinary Action has been imposed on the student.

Table: Summary of branch change criteria for students in UG (B.Tech./ B.S.) Programs

After Sem	Branch Enrolled	Branch Applied	CGPA	Eligibility	Lower Limit	Upper Limit

II	Any	Any	CGPA ≥ 8.5 Others

CGPA ≥ 7.5 (For SC,ST, PWD)	E1

E2

E3	90% of current Strength	110% of Sanctioned Strength

II	Any	ES	CGPA ≥ 8 Others

CGPA ≥ 7 (For SC,ST, PWD)	E1

E2

E3	90% of current Strength	30

Note: 1. No Branch Change post second year onwards.

2. This will be applicable to UG Students admitted in academic year 2025-26.

3. If the calculated upper limit of permissible strength is a fractional number, the upper limit for seats will be the lower rounded number (floor operation).

4. If the calculated lower limit of permissible strength is a fractional number, the lower limit for seats will be the higher rounded number (ceil operation).

Discontinuation of Branch Change from Academic Year 2026–27 in UG Programs.

17. Requirements
[Back to index]

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she/he has met the conditions laid down in the following Clauses 17.1 to 17.4

17.1 Minimum Duration of Residence
[Back to index]

Minimum residential requirement

S.No.	Program	Minimum Duration of Residence (in semesters)

1	B. Tech. (including minor/department/interdisciplinary area specialization)	6

2	B. Tech. – M.Tech.	8

17.2 Academic

[Back to index]

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum credits as per Table 11.2 in Section 11.3 for all degrees.

17.3 Payment of Fees and Dues
[Back to index]

The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).

17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
[Back to index]

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.

17.5 Completion of engagement in NCC, NSS or NSO
[Back to index]

The student should have completed extra-curricular activity like performing arts, sports, National Cadet Corps, National Service Schemes, and National Sports Organisation for a period of at least two Semesters during their B.Tech. Program.

17.6 Award of Degrees
[Back to index]

17.6.1 Provisional Certificate

A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can be provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman, Senate. Certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable.

17.6.2 Degree Certificate

A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its approval. Certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable.

17.6.3 Withdrawal of Degree

Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation requirements is detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student.

18. Amendments
[Back to index]

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to modify/amend without notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules pertaining to its B.Tech. Programs.

Regulations for Postgraduate Programmes
[Back to index]

19. Postgraduate Programmes
[Back to index]

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate programmes.

Master of Science (M.Sc.)

Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech

Master of Technology (M.Tech.)

Dual degree: M.Tech.-PhD.

Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)

20. Postgraduate admissions
[Back to index]

The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition, the department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis and admit students as per the existing procedure.

20.1 Categories of Admission
[Back to index]

A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories

Full-time regular

Full-time sponsored

Part-time

External

Executive

However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time program).

i) Full-time Regular

In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.

ii) Full-time Sponsored

In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The candidate is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must have two years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.

iii) Part-time

A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attend regular classes as per the schedule of the Institute. The student must be employed in the neighbourhood of IIT Jodhpur. The student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student.

iv) External

A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped with the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.

v) Executive (only for M. Tech.)

A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in

An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR

Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in a maximum of 6 years.

The part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote contact mode and limited direct interaction

20.2 Eligibility for Admission
[Back to index]

The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.

The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the Senate from time to time.

Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of Governors.

20.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)

The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the following two avenues.

The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by IITs.

The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

20.2.2 Admission to M Sc – M Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)

The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the following two avenues

The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by IITs.

The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

20.2.3 Admission to M Tech Program (Regular)

The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and Veterinary Sciences or in a related field

A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

20.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)

The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and Veterinary Science or in a related field.

A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

The applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience (after qualifying degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after registration.

The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

20.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)

The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and Veterinary Science or in a related field

A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

20.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)

Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any organization in India or abroad.

The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),

The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,

The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for SC/ST).

20.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme (QIP), Defence Personnel

The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval of Chairman, Senate.

20.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals

INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of applying for admission.

The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. 

The applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category. Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.

The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for admission to the programme. The department’s recommendation will be sent to the Chairperson, Senate through the Chairperson, AC.

20.2.9 Admission to Ph.D (sponsored/external/part-time)

Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in India or abroad.

The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),

The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,

The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for SC/ST).

The applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience (after qualifying degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the program.

The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

20.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students

A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities.

Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 20.2. The application must be routed through the office of Dean R&D.

Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.

20.4 Reservation Policy

The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.

21 PG Registration
[Back to index]

21.1 Limits on Registration
[Back to index]

Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs:

M.Sc.: An M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10 credits in a semester.

M.Tech.: An M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 21.1.

Table 21.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular semester/Summer Term

 	M.Tech. student registered under different categories	Maximum Credits	Minimum Credits

Regular Semester	Executive (Accelerated)	24	10

Executive (Normal)	17	10

Executive (Slow-Paced)	12	3

Executive (Part-Time)	12	3

Full-time (Regular/Sponsored)	17	10

External	20	10

Part-time	12	3

Summer Term	Executive (Accelerated)	16	0

Executive (Normal)	9	0

Executive (Slow-Paced)	6	0

Full-time (Regular)	9	5

Full-time (Sponsored)	9	0

External	9	0

Part-time	6	0

Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular semester/Summer Term[Insert TableTable 21.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular semester/Summer Term]
 

M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) – The maximum and minimum credits that an M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree student can register are equivalent to that of an M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.

Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 21.2.

Table 21.2 Maximum and Minimum Credits a Ph.D. student (Regular) can register for during the Regular semester

Ph.D. student registered under different categories	Maximum Credits	Minimum Credits

Full-time Regular	12	6

External	12	6

Part-Time	12	3

21.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)

A student admitted to an M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status. A student can maintain RKA status for a maximum of 6 semesters.

21.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree Programme
[Back to index]

A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of the second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the end of the third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to a dual degree in the fourth semester with the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be required to complete his/her candidacy requirements by the end of the fifth semester. 

All conditions of M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.

21.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. Program
[Back to index]

A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may be allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be counted towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.

21.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. Programme
[Back to index]

A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:

have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;
get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;
produce a “No Objection” Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the research work.

21.5 Maximum Duration of a Program
[Back to index]

M.Sc. – 8 registered semester

M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) – 12 registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as at of sponsored candidates.

Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) – 14 registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that of sponsored candidates.

Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.

21.6 Course Registration
[Back to index]

Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 21.1 and Table 4.4. The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during her/his Masters or Bachelors program.

22 Academic Requirements
[Back to index]

22.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programmes
[Back to index]

The total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 22.1 and 22.2 for M.Sc. and M.Tech. Ph.D. programmes respectively. 

Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

Table 22.1 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Sc.

Type	L-T-P	Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours#	Total Credits (TC=TH/3)

Contact Hours (CH)	Beyond ContactHours (BCH)	TotalHours(TH)

1 hour of Lecture	1-0-0	1	2	3	1.0

1 hour of Tutorial	0-1-0	1	2	3	1.0

1 hour of Lab	0-0-1	1	0.5	1.5	0.5

1 hour of Project#	0-0-1	1	2	3	1.0
#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.

Table 22.2 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Tech./Ph.D.

Type	L-T-P	Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours#	Total Credits (TC=TH/4)

Contact Hours (CH)	Beyond ContactHours (BCH)	TotalHours(TH)

1 hour of Lecture	1-0-0	1	3	4	1.0

1 hour of Tutorial	0-1-0	1	3	4	1.0

1 hour of Lab	0-0-1	1	1	2	0.5

1 hour of Project#	0-0-1	1	3	4	1.0

1 hour of Thesis (Ph.D.)	0-0-1	1	3	4	1.0
#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.

h4> 22.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes
[Back to index]

Compulsory Course (MC)

Programme Elective (ME)

Open Elective (MO)

Project works (MP)

Non-graded (NG)

22.3 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. Students
[Back to index]

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Sc. students are given below in Table 22.3.

Table 22.3 Programs/ Credits to be earned for MSc students

Programs	Minimum Credits to be earned

MC	ME	MO	MP	Total

M.Sc. (Chemistry)	38	18	6	15	77

M.Sc. (Mathematics)	38	18	6	15	77

M.Sc. (Physics)	38	18	6	15	77

22.4 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. Students/ Executive M.Tech.
[Back to index]

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Tech. students are given below in Table 22.4.

Table 22.4 Minimum Credits to be earned For MTech students

Programs	Minimum Credits to be earned

MC	ME	MO	MP	NG	Total

M.Tech (Sensors and Internet of Things)	19	17	6	16	4	62

M.Tech (Cyber Physical System)	18	18	6	16	4	62

M.Tech (Thermofluids Engineering)	17	17	6	16	4	60

M.Tech (Advanced Manufacturing Engineering and Design)	19	15	6	16	4	60

M.Tech (Metallurgical and Materials Engineering)	16	18	6	16	4	60

M.Tech (Artificial Intelligence)	18	18	6	16	4	62

M.Tech (Computer Science and Engineering)	18	18	6	16	4	62

M.Tech (Bioscience and Bioengineering)	18	17	6	16	4	61

M.Tech (Data and Computational Sciences)	20	15	6	16	4	61

22.5 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. – M.Tech. Dual Degree
[Back to index]

Minimum credit requirements for M.Sc. – M.Tech. Dual Degree is the cumulative sum of credit requirements for respective M.Sc. program and M.Tech. program as mentioned in Sections 22.3 and 22.4.

22.6 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree
[Back to index]

Course categories and academic requirements for MTech – PhD dual degree students are given below in Table 22.5.

Table 22.5 Minimum Credits to be earned for dual degree MTech and PhD students

Programs	Minimum Credits to be earned

MC	ME	MO	MP	NG	Total

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Sensors and Internet of Things)	19	17	6	16	4	62

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Cyber Physical System)	18	18	6	16	4	62

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Communication and Signal Processing)	17	17	6	16	4	60

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Thermofluids Engineering)	17	17	6	16	4	60

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Manufacturing Engineering)	17	17	6	16	4	60

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Design Engineering)	17	17	6	16	4	60

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Metallurgical and Materials Engineering)	16	18	6	16	4	60

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Computer Science and Engineering)	18	18	6	16	4	62

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Artificial Intelligence)	18	18	6	16	4	62

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Bioscience and Bioengineering)	18	17	6	16	4	61

The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during Bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses

22.7 Academic Credit Requirements for Ph.D. Students
[Back to index]

The minimum credits to be earned through courses is listed in Table 22.6.

Table 22.6 Credit Requirements for PhD students

S.No.	Ph.D. in	With	Minimum Credits through Course Work	Minimum Credits through Thesis Work

1.0	Engineering discipline/IDRP	M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an Engineering discipline	12	48

M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline	30	48

B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) in an Engineering discipline	30	48

2.0	Science, Humanities or Social Science discipline	M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a Science, Humanities or Social Science discipline	12	48

22.8 Academic Performance Requirements
[Back to index]

22.8.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program

The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given in below Table 22.7.

Table 22.7 Minimum CGPA requirements

Sr. No.	Program	Continuation in Programme	For graduation

1	M.Sc. (only graduation requirement)	Refer 22.8.2	5

2	M.Tech.	5	5

3	Dual Degree (M.Sc. and M.Tech.)	5	5

4	Dual Degree (M.Tech. and Ph.D.)	7	7

5	Ph.D.	7	7.5 at completion of course work

22.8.2 Continuing criteria for M.Sc.

M.Sc.- The student must earn at least 20 credits at the end of the second semester for continuation in the program.

22.8.3 Minimum performance for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship

The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship is given in below Table 22.8

Table 22.8 Minimum CGPA requirements for Continuation of Assistantship/ Fellowship

Sr. No.	Program	Continuation of Assistantship/Fellowship

1	M.Tech.	6.5

2	Dual Degree (M.Tech. and Ph.D.)	7.0

3	Ph.D.	7.0
 

23. Leave Rules
[Back to index]

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the DRC.

23.1 Leave
[Back to index]

A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid semester break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter term or mid-semester break. A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC without assistantship during that period.

23.2 Other Leaves
[Back to index]

Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MHRD. It will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme. Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MHRD.

23.3 Semester Withdrawal
[Back to index]

May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. 

In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of Academics regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the Academic Committee. 

Semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student.

23.4 Academic Leave
[Back to index]

Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as

Fieldwork

Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library

Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ

Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium

Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision

Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as indicated in his research proposal

Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with a sister institution in India or abroad

All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is granted. SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship during academic leave

A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave.

A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as certified by SRC and approved by DRC.

24. Financial Assistance
[Back to index]

Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following:

24.1 M.Sc. Program
[Back to index]

24.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program
[Back to index]

A student having completed minimum credit requirements of an M.Sc. program at the end of the second year with

(a) CGPA>=8

OR
(b) have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.

24.3 M.Tech. Program
[Back to index]

A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.

24.4 Executive M Tech Program
[Back to index]

Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the Institute.

24.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
[Back to index]

Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with regular Ph.D. students.

24.6 Ph.D. Program
[Back to index]

A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the norms of IIT Jodhpur.

(a) A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master’s degree with GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD norms/or equivalent applicable for non-science departments.

(b) The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech or equivalent post-bachelor’s degree
(c) A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.

A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided the student has met qualifier requirement. The enhanced fellowship will commence from the date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the qualifier requirement. The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student shall stop from the day of submission of the Thesis.

25. Rules and Regulations For M.Tech./M.Sc._Project
[Back to index]

Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor(s).

The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester.

Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).

Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the department (maybe outside the Institute also). DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. The same committee may examine more than one thesis. External member can be on VC. DRC will ensure that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.

A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer semester following 2 nd semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be evaluated by his supervisor.

26 Rules and Regulations for Ph.D./M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
[Back to index]

26.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)
[Back to index]

26.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates

The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research. There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the candidate at the time of selection.

26.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)

Ph. D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be assigned at the time of selection.

Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor(s).

For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. – Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester

The Convener, DRC (Department Research Committee)/Coordinator (Interdisciplinary Research Program) would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).

There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.

A supervisor from outside the institute, before the qualifier, may be appointed on the request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean (Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.

The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor.

26.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor

Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the DRC/IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Committee) shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the student to take care of the administrative requirements.

Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor

The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.

The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as a supervisor and will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared qualifier before the supervisor’s retirement/resignation.

26.1.4 Composition of Departmental Research Committee (DRC)

The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs of the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed by the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by Professor/Associate Professor nominated by Head of the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The DRC has to be approved by Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the convenor of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years.

26.1.5 Composition of Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC)

The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics).

26.2 Change of Research Supervisor
[Back to index]

Change of supervisor (s), under exceptional circumstances, shall be permitted by Dean (Academics) on the recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of (i) the student (ii) the present supervisor (s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s). If required, realignment of student’s research program will happen under the supervision of the DRC/IRC.

26.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)
[Back to index]

26.3.1 Composition of SRC

The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the department (maybe outside the Institute also).

A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by Dean (Academics).

The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean (Academics).

The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.

Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through the DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record

Chairman and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the thesis.

The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of the program.

26.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)
[Back to index]

The academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the SRC and peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii) A Poster Presentation open to all. SRC will award a Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based upon (i) and (ii). Two consecutive Non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration.

For implementational convenience, academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following the groupings of students and scheduling guidelines are suggested

1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: During 1st July to 30th September of the year.

2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: During 1st December to 28th February of the year.

The first APM will be conducted after the successful completion of qualifier requirements. Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be reported by the supervisor(s) through the SRC for record. Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and approved by Dean (academics)

26.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student
[Back to index]

The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.

1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 22.8.1

2. Cleared comprehensive examination

3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research

4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal

The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and in any case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the Ph. D. program. Part-time candidates will need to complete the qualifier requirement before the beginning of the seventh semester.

26.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student

The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the field of research.

The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination Committee of the Department/IDRP.

The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.

Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting a comprehensive examination. Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. The course content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and the Senate. The syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in that area.

The SRC will specify a set three papers as a comprehensive requirement for a particular student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.

The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student within two weeks of SRC formation.

All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.

A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.

If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear within six months of the first attempt.

For clearing of the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all papers.

Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:

Ph.D. : within 3 semesters

Direct Ph.D. and MTech – PhD Dual Degree: within 5 semesters

26.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)

Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State of Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area. The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory grade in SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal.

26.5.3 Research Proposal

Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion of SOTA. The research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the candidate.

26.6. Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree
[Back to index]

A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D. degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such students who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis.

26.7 Relaxation in M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program
[Back to index]

M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also convert into part-time/external Ph.D. student and exit with M.Tech degree if all conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.

The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends the continuance of registration.

26.8 Cancellation of Registration
[Back to index]

The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC or who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.

The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the maximum permissible period specified in Section 21.5 will be liable for cancellation.

26.9 Synopsis
[Back to index]

Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal closed-door assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC

The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied with the quality and quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.

Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis report

Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar date. If required, an extension of three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics) on the recommendation of SRC.

If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be asked to present the synopsis again.

On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in 4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis, the student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in the required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for consideration of the SRC.

The student should have at least one paper either published or accepted for publication in a refereed journal/refereed conference (SRC members are required to certify the quality of journals/conference).

26.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation
[Back to index]

The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty Members from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in which the student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, the following guidelines should be followed

The examiners shall have at least 6 years of Post-Ph.D. experience;

No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and

The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.

Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners.

The Chairman, Senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. In addition, SRC and Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.

The Viva Voce will be conducted in the presence of SRC, supervisor(s) and the external examiner.

One of the external examiners shall attend the Thesis Defense.

The examiners shall submit a written report on the thesis within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the Thesis.

If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean (Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.

If any of the examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean (Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration. The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D. program.

If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D. program.

If an examiner suggests a revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis after the revision within a prescribed time period of 6 months in consultation with the Supervisor(s).

When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.

The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within India and other Faculty Members (quorum would be Chairman, SRC, Supervisor(s) and an external examiner), who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to Senate, to consider the award of Ph.D. degree to the student.

27. Graduation Requirements
[Back to index]

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she/he has met the requirements laid down in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4 below.

27.1 Minimum Residential Requirement
[Back to index]

Table 27.1 Minimum residential requirement

S.No.	Program	Qualifications at the time of joining the Program	Minimum Duration (in semesters) of Residence

1.0	M.Sc.	All qualifying degrees	4.0

2.0	M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree	All qualifying degrees	7.0

3.0	M.Tech. PG Programmes

 	Full-time Regular /Sponsored	All qualifying degrees	3.0

 	Part-time/ Part-time Executive	All qualifying degrees	0.0

 	Executive	All qualifying degrees	1.0

4.0	Ph. D. Programs

 	Full-time Regular

 	Engineering discipline	M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an Engineering discipline	2.0

 	M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline	5.0

 	B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) in an Engineering discipline	5.0

 	Science, Humanities or Social Science discipline	M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a Science, Humanities or Social Science discipline	2.0

 	Part-time	All qualifying degrees	0.0

 	External	All qualifying degrees	1.0
 

27.2 Academic
[Back to index]

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum credits as per Section 22.3 for M. Sc., Section 22.4 for M. Tech., Section 22.5 for M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 22.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 22.7 for Ph.D., while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 22.09. PG Programmes which are M.Tech.

27.3 No Dues Clearance
[Back to index]

Degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by Dean (Academics)

27.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
[Back to index]

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.

27.5 Award of Degrees
[Back to index]

27.5.1 Provisional Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, can be provided with a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman, Senate.

27.5.2 Degree Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, is recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its approval.

28. AMENDMENTS
[Back to index]

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes at IIT-Jodhpur.

Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the
highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge
creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, social
sciences and engineering. 

IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able
to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as energy,
food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific knowledge, IIT

Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and
team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on
campus.

The academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning,
creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing
deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability
to address and solve new problems with free and objective mind.

The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit System
and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted

Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired by Dean
(Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics- PG)/Associate

Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).

The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure high standard
of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within this
broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can include
additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These academic
programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate modifications/
improvements as and when necessary.

2. ACADEMIC SESSION

The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the
next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer
term as per the following timelines:

Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November

Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April

Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.

Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at
least 70.

2.1 Academic Calendar

The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic

Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of
courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,
declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the

Senate.

3. REGISTRATION
a. Registration: Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on
the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of
registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late
registration.

b. Provisional Registration: A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final results
of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate
from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the
qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying
examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be
regularized.

c. Late Registration: If the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned
in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against deregistration may be
made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. The Chairman Senate may permit the
continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.

d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of the

Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.

e. Withdrawing from a Course: After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the option of
withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically within four weeks
from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. The withdrawn course
will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.

f. Cancellation of Semester Registration: Absence for a period of four or more weeks during a
semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all the
courses in that semester.

g. Summer course registration: A department may offer summer courses to enable the students
to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during summer
provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered on
approval of the Dean/ Associate Dean.

4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION

4.1 Teaching

4.1.1 Medium of Instruction

The medium of instruction is English.

4.1.2 Course Structure

All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course is based on the number of contact hours
for lectures, tutorials, and practicals. A student on successful completion of the course with a
passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic
maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can consist
of independent components which can be completed independently. These components are
called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all parameters
related to the course numbering scheme. PG Programmes which are M.Tech.

Table 4.1 Course Code Description

Course Code M E L 1 X X 1

Descriptions Offering

Department/IDRP

Course

Type

Level of

Courses

Unique Identification

Number

Indicates

Fractal

Categories See Table 4.2 See

Table 4.3

See Table

4.4

This code will be given

centrally by the office of
academics

0: Regular

1: Fractal 1

2: Fractal 2

3: Fractal 3

Note: Examples of course codes

Course Title L-T-P Course Code

Regular Course Engineering Mechanics 2-1-0 MEL1XX0

Fractal Course

Robotics 3-0-2 MEL7XX0

Fractal 1: Robot Modelling 1-0-0 MEL7XX1

Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming 1-0-0 MEL7XX2

Fractal 3: Robot Control 1-0-0 MEL7XX3

Table 4.2 Departmental Code

S. N. Type Department/Platform/Office

Department

1 ME Mechanical Engineering

2 CS Computer Science and Engineering

3 EE Electrical Engineering

4 CI Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

5 CH Chemical Engineering

6 BB Bioscience and Bioengineering

7 MT Metallurgical & Materials Engineering

8 CY Chemistry

9 MA Mathematics

10 PH Physics

11 HS Humanities and Social Science

Interdisciplinary Research Platforms (IDRPs)

12 DH Digital Humanities

13 SS Space Science and Technology

14 IO Internet of Things and Applications

15 RM Robotics and Mobility Systems

16 QC Quantum Information and Computation

17 SH Smart Healthcare

Schools

18 MS School of Management & Entrepreneurship

19 AI School of Artificial Intelligence & Data Science

20 SL School of Liberal Arts

Others

21 OA Office of Academics

22 OS Office of Students

Table 4.3 Types for Courses

S.

N.

Course

Type

Category

1 L Lecture courses (other than lecture hours, these courses can have Tutorial and Practical
hours, e.g. L-T-P Structures 3-0-0, 3-1-2, 3-0-2, 2-0-0, etc.)

2 P Practical / Practice based courses (where performance is evaluated primarily on the basis
of practice, practical or laboratory work with LTP structures such as 0-0-3, 0-0-4, 1-0-3,

0-1-3, etc.)

3 D Project based courses (e.g. Major, Minor, Mini Projects)

4 N Non-graded core component

5 T Thesis

6 Q Seminar Courses

7 S Independent Study

8 R Product Realization

9 E Engineering Design (Graded and Non-Graded)

Table 4.4 Level of Courses, category and credit requirements

S.

N.

Level Category Credit Requirements

1 100 Courses for B.Tech. Programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=0)

2 200

3 300 B.Tech. (Cr>=38)

4 400 B.Tech. (Cr>=75)

5 500 Preparatory Courses of M.Sc. and M.Tech. Programmes (NOT

open to B.Tech. and B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree)

M.Tech. (Cr=0)

M. Sc. (Cr=0)

6 600 Courses for M.Sc. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=75)

M.Sc. (Cr>=0)

M.Tech. (Cr >= 0)

7 700 Courses for M.Tech. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=85 with

CGPA>=6*)

M.Sc. (Cr >=30)

M.Tech. (Cr>=0)

Ph.D. (Cr>=0)

Advanced courses for M.Sc.

8 800 Advanced courses for M.Tech. and Ph.D. programmes, An 800 level
course should have 700 level course as a pre-requisite

M.Tech. (Cr>=14)

Ph.D. (Cr>=0)

4.1.3 Approval of Courses

The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved
courses may be offered during any semester/summer term.

4.1.4 List of Courses

The list of courses to be offered in a Program is finalized before the beginning of the semester, by
the Department hosting that Program.

4.1.5 Categories of Courses

Courses offered can be from one of the following categories:

a) Regular course:

A regular course has 14 hours of classroom engagement per credit. A regular course can be under
elective or core/compulsory categories.

Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students
register for the course. A 700 or 800 level elective course can run with a minimum of 5 registered
students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study course as per
the following section.

b) Self-study Course

A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by the Senate. The main features of a
self-study course are as follows:

● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course
provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student
is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.

● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in
self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered
as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course
with prior approval of the competent authority.

● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a

Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program committee. The final
sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).

● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.

● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the
award of letter grade at the end of the semester.

● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.

● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.
c) Independent Study Course

Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest
under the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involving
an instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-discipline and having a sense of
own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. A
student having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for Independent Study courses with the
recommendation of the Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study
course are as follows:

● A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study
course not exceeding 3 credits in self-study mode at most once during the program. Such
an independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the
program and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript.

● Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate
recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program
committee. The final sanction of an independent-study course to a student is made by the

Dean (Academics).

● Normally, no formal lectures will be held for an independent study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.

● The course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. The

Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award
of letter grade at the end of the semester.

4.1.6 Conduct of Courses

Each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors,
as needed. The instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance
of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per

Subsection 5.2.

The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations
conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the instructor(s) concerned.

The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.

A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either 
(i) direct contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. 

Indirect contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face-to-face physical interaction with
the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students
to be concurrently connected to the class-room interaction via electronic conferencing involving
both audio and video communication. 

However, there has to be direct interaction between
faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided
study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up study of an
approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be also
adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the senate,
under supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation components applicable to courses being run
through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical
supervision of a faculty. All laboratory components of a course requiring use of a specialized
facility will be conducted through direct contact.

4.1.7 Teaching Assignments

The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the

Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are
also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in
consultation with the Head of that Department.

4.1.8 Auditing of Courses

A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the
permission of Dean (Academics) on the recommendations of the Instructor of the course being
audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade

Card of the student.

4.1.9 Attendance Requirements

A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless the student takes leave of absence
for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. The attendance
records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the student’s
attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. Students not
meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade to pass a
course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower than the cut-off for C
grade in a course.

4.2 Evaluation

The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the
classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers and
projects.

The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous
basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each
subject in each semester.

● Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of
a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes
duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits)
must have at least one examination.

● The total weightage of the examination component (three examinations for a 14-week
long course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.

● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.

● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom,
quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.

5. GRADING SYSTEM

5.1 Letter Grades

At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the

Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten
regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each course.

Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in Table 5.1.

In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand for Incomplete,

Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty member shall
upload grades on the portal as per stipulated time schedule.

Table 5.1 Letter grade and its equivalent grade points

S.N. Letter Grade Grade Points Comment

1 A* 10 Exceptional

2 A 10 Outstanding

3 A- 9 Excellent

4 B 8 Very Good

5 B- 7 Good

6 C 6 Average

7 C- 5 Below Average

8 D 4 Marginal

9 E 2 Poor

10 F 0 Fail

11 I Incomplete

12 S Satisfactory in Course

13 X Thesis Continuation

14 U Unsatisfactory

15 W Withdrawn

A detailed description of some of the grades is given below:

S.N. Grades Description

1 A*
‘A*’ grade has the same grade point as ‘A’ grade. The grade ‘A*’ indicates exceptional
performance and is awarded only in the Course/(s) in which the number of registered
students is more than 50. It should not exceed 2 % of the total strength of the particular
theory or lab course. The grade ‘A*’ is not awarded for projects /seminars.

2 E ‘E’ Grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the cutoff marks for
‘D’ Grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute. Students who obtain an ‘E’

Grade will be eligible to appear in an additional examination. If they perform satisfactorily,
they become eligible for getting the ‘E’ grade converted to a ‘D’ Grade, otherwise, they will
continue to have ‘E’ Grade. The student will have only one chance to appear for the
additional examination for an ‘E’ Grade. 

The additional examination will be conducted
within the first week of the next semester. The date of additional examination of Institute
core courses for undergraduate students will be centrally notified, while for all other
courses, the date would be announced by the respective course coordinators. A student
can appear for a maximum of three such additional tests in a given semester. 

If a student
cannot appear for the test due to any reason(s), he/she will not get any additional chance.

If a student with ‘E’ grade in a course does not pass the course through the additional test,
or obtains an ‘F’ grade in the course, he/she has to repeat the course if it is a core course.

In case the course is an elective, the student may take the same course again or any other
course. ‘E’ and ‘F’ Grades are not counted in the calculation of the CGPA; however, these
are taken into account in the calculation of the SGPA.

3 I An ‘I’ grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his/her request to denote incomplete
performance in a course on approval of an instructor. An ‘I’ grade is awarded in case of
missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical grounds or other special
circumstances. Requests for ‘I’ grade should be made at the earliest but not later than the
last day of major tests. All evaluation requirements for such students in the corresponding
course(s) should be completed on or before the last date of add and drop of courses
specified in the academic calendar. Upon completion of all course requirements, the ‘I’
grade is converted to a regular grade.

4 S This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded and Audit
courses or in a thesis after successful completion of the open seminar. The grades
obtained in an audit course are not considered in the calculation of SGPA or CGPA.

5 X This grade is awarded to a student in a course for continuation.

6 U This grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis, audit or
non-graded courses.

7 W This grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course. Withdrawal
from a course is permitted until the date specified in the Academics Calendar.

5.2 Procedure for declaration of results

The following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and time line would be as
per Academic Calendar.

1. Evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester

2. Display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors

3. Finalization of grades by Instructors

4. Grade moderation by department/institute level committee for department/institute
wide courses

5. Recommendation of grades by the Head of the Department after scrutiny of grades by a
department moderation committee

6. Display of grades by Instructors

7. Grade correction, if any, within 48 hours of display of grades after approval of the head of
the department

8. Approval of Grade by the Dean (UG/PG)/Associate Dean(UG/PGs)

9. Finalization of results by the Dean (UG/PG)/Associate Dean(UG/PG)

10. Approval of results by the Chairman Senate

11. Results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. In exceptional cases,
an appeal may be made to the Chairman, Senate for reconsideration, with formal
justification.

5.3 Grade Point Averages

5.3.1 Semester Grade Point Average

The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average of the grades earned by a
student in all courses credited by her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the
respective semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student in

N courses registered during a semester are G1
, G2
, … GN, and the corresponding credits C1
, C2
, …

CN, then the SGPA is given by the following formula:

The SGPA is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and
courses in which S/X grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester.

5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average

The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall academic performance of a
student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. The CGPA is computed
similarly as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters. The CGPA is calculated on the
basis of all pass grades (A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D), except audit courses and courses in which S/X
grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters.

The SGPA and CGPA calculation is based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone.

6. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT

A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at the
end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses,
credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades)
earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.

7. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES

The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those
related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by
the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All
such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.

8. MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS

A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness
etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The student
should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor within ten
days from the date of the missed examination, explaining the reasons for their absence.

Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take a
make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a
hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the
following categories:

● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the

Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted in the Hospital during the period
of the missed quiz/exam.

● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital
before they proceed for such consultation.

● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer
of the Institute Hospital.

● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a medical
certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly
endorsed by the parent/guardian.

A slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup /
supplementary week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those
who are permitted to take the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up
examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. However, in
exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up
examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in consultation with the Dean of Academics
may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the
first week of the next semester. Under no circumstances prorating can be done for the
missed examinations or attendance.

POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate
programmes.

1. Master of Science (M.Sc.)

2. Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech.

3. Master of Technology (M.Tech.)

4. Dual degree: M.Tech.-PhD.

5. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)

10. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS

The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway
during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition, the
department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis and
admit students as per the existing procedure.

10.1Categories of Admission

A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories
i. Full-time regular
ii. Full-time sponsored
iii. Part-time
iv. External
v. Part-time (online)
vi. Part-time (Project sponsored)
vii. Executive

However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be
offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time programs).

i) Full-time Regular

An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student
supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.

ii) Full-time Sponsored

An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The
candidate is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must
have two years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.

iii) Part-time

A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attends regular classes as per
schedule of the Institute. The student must produce an NOC from the employer for pursuing the
programme at IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as
compared to a full-time regular student.

iv) External

A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped with
the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay in the
campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.

v) Part-time (online)

A part-time (online) student is a working professional who, while employed, attends classes in a
synchronous audio-visual mode as per the schedule of the Institute including limited contact
sessions. The student is expected to register for a limited number of credits per semester. The
student will need to spend at least 12 months in the campus before submission of the Ph.D thesis
distributed over the entire period of the programme as per the academic requirements. The
student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at IIT Jodhpur
certifying that the employer will also provide access to resources for proper execution of the
research work.

vi) Part-time (Project sponsored)

A part-time candidate is a project student receiving fellowship at least at the MoE stipulated rate
being supported through research projects running in the institute. The student can register only for
a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student. The student is expected to
receive the fellowship for a minimum of 36 months. The student will be paying fees at the same rate
as that of full time GATE Qualified candidates. The Department will process the applications ONLY if
such a position is available in the respective M. Tech. program.

vii) Executive (only for M. Tech.)

A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in

1. An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR

2. Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in maximum of 6 years.

3. Part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote contact
mode and limited direct interaction

10.2 Eligibility for Admission

a. The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may
prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.

a. The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the

Senate from time to time.

b. Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of

Governors.

UG students enrolled in BTech programmes follow a semester-based curriculum.

PG students enrolled in MTech programmes undertake advanced coursework and thesis work.

10.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)

The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the
following two avenues.

a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by

IITs.

b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3 or 4 year program)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for

SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0
for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first class as specified by the university/institute.

10.2.2 Admission to M.Sc – M.Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)

The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be
through any one of the following two avenues.

a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by

IITs.

b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3 or 4 year program)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for

SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0
for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first class as specified by the university/institute.

10.2.3 Admission to M.Tech Program (Regular)

a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and

Veterinary Sciences or in related field

b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first
class as specified by the university/institute.

c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

10.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)

a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and

Veterinary Science or in related fields.

b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first
class as specified by the university/institute.

c) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after
the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after registration.

d) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

10.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)

a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and

Veterinary Science or in related field

b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first
class as specified by the university/institute.

c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.

10.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)

a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic
program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any
organization in India or abroad.

b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10

CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),

OR

c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with

MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,

OR

d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for

SC/ST) .

10.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme (QIP),

Defence Personnel

The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval
of Chairman, Senate.

10.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals

INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of
applying for admission.

The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and
when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The
applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and
attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category.

Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.

The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural

Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for
admission to the programme. The department's recommendation will be sent to the Chairperson,

Senate through the Chairperson, AC.

10.2.9 Admission to Ph.D. (sponsored/external/part-time)

a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic
program in India or abroad.

b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10

CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),

OR

c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with

MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,

OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for

SC/ST) .

e) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program.

f) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.


UG admission to BTech is through JEE, while PG admission to MTech is through GATE.

BTech is the flagship UG programme; MTech is the flagship PG programme at IIT Jodhpur.


10.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students

A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to
complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-degree
student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other
academic facilities.

Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate
satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 10.2. The application must be routed
through the office of Dean R&D. A casual student can register up to a maximum of 9 credits in a
semester. On successful completion of the course, students will be awarded with a Course

Completion Certificate and Grade obtained. A casual student can also accumulate credits to
petition for a certificate or a diploma from IIT Jodhpur.

Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.

10.4 Reservation Policy

The reservation policy of the Government of India will be followed.

11. PG REGISTRATION

11.1 Limits on Registration

Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs:
● M.Sc.: A M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10
credits in a semester.
● M.Tech.: A M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table

11.1.

Table 11.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits a M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular
semester/Summer Term :

UG BTech students study foundational engineering; PG MTech students pursue specialised research.

The department offers both UG and PG programmes, namely BTech and MTech respectively.

M.Tech. student registered under different
categories

Indicative Maximum

Credits

Minimum

Credits

Regular

Semester

Executive (Accelerated) 24 10

Executive (Normal) 17 10

Executive (Slow-Paced) 12 3

Executive (Part Time) 12 3

Full-time (Regular/Sponsored) 17 10

External 20 10

Part-time 12 3

Summer Term Executive (Accelerated) 16 0

Executive (Normal) 9 0

Executive (Slow-Paced) 6 0

Full-time (Regular) 9 5

Full-time (Sponsored) 9 0

External 9 0

Part-time 6 0

● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and
minimum credits that a M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/direct Ph.D. student can register are
equivalent to that of a M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.

● Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 11.2.

Table 11.2 Maximum and Minimum Credits a Ph.D. student can register for during the Regular
semester

Ph.D. student registered under different
categories

Indicative

Maximum Credits
(before qualifier)

Indicative

Maximum Credits
(after qualifier)

Minimum

Credits

Full-time Regular 16 16 6

External 16 12 6

Part-Time 12 12 3

11.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)

A student admitted to a M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any
professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his
intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean (academic). The
candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status.

11.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. (Regular) Programme to M.Tech. (Part-time)

Programme

A full-time regular M.Tech. student may be allowed to change the registration to the part-time

M.Tech. programme after successful completion of third semester. A student requesting such a
conversion must:
i) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC; and
ii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work

11.3 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree

Programme

A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of
second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the end of
third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to dual degree in the fourth semester with
the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be required to complete
his/her candidacy requirements by the end of fifth semester.

All conditions of the M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All
such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.

11.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. Program

PG Programmes which are M.Tech

A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may be
allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be counted
towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.

11.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. Programme

A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time

Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:

i) have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;

ii) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;

iii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work.

11.5 Maximum Duration of a Program

The BTech degree is awarded to UG students who complete all programme requirements.

The MTech degree is awarded to PG students who complete the required credits and dissertation.

● M.Sc. - 8 registered semester

● M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) - 12 registered semesters which
may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of
the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as that of sponsored candidates.

● Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14
registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive
(RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as
that of sponsored candidates.

● Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.

11.6 Course Registration

Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 11.1 and

Table 4.4.

The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during
her/his Masters or Bachelors program.

12. ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS

12.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programmes which are M.Tech or Ph.D

The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial,
and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 12.1 and 12.2 for M.Sc. and M.Tech. Ph.D.
programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the
expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each
contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

Table 12.1 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Sc.

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours

# Total Credits (TC=TH/3)

Contact Hours (CH) Beyond Contact

Hours (BCH)

Total

Hours
(TH)

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 2 3 1

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 2 3 1

1 hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 0.5 1.5 0.5

1 hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 2 3 1
#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,
etc.

Table 12.2 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Tech./Ph.D.

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact

Hours
#

Total Credits
(TC=TH/4)

Contact Hours (CH) Beyond Contact

Hours (BCH)

M.Tech pg programs

Hours
(TH)

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 3 4 1

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 3 4 1

1 hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 1 2 0.5

1 hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 3 4 1

1 hour of Thesis
(Ph.D.)

0-0-1 1 3 4 1
#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,
etc.

12.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes

1) Compulsory Course (MC)

2) Programme Compulsory (PC)

2) Programme Elective (ME)

3) Open Elective (MO/OE)

4) Specialization Core (SC)

5) Specialization Elective (SE)

6) Specialization Stream Electives (SSE)

7) Micro Specialization Core (MSC)

8) Project works (MP)

9) Non-graded (NG)

12.3 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. Students

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Sc. students are given below in Table 12.3.

Table 12.3 Programs/ Credits to be earned for MSc students

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

MC ME MO MP Total

M.Sc. (Chemistry) 38 18 06 15 77

M.Sc. (Mathematics) 38 18 06 15 77

M.Sc. (Physics) 38 18 06 15 77

M.Sc. (Digital Humanities) 37 18 06 15 76

Program Minimum Credits to be earned

PC SE/SC OE MP Total

M.Sc. (Computational Social Science) 37 18 6 15 76

12.4 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. Students/ Executive M.Tech.

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Tech. students are given below in Table 12.4.

Table 12.4 Minimum Credits to be earned For MTech students

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

MC ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech pg programs are:

M.Tech (Sensors and Internet of Things) 19 17 06 16 4 62

M.Tech (Cyber Physical System) 18 18 06 16 4 62

M.Tech (Thermofluids Engineering) 17 17 06 16 4 60

M.Tech (Advanced Manufacturing and Design) 19 15 06 16 4 60

M.Tech (Materials Engineering) 16 18 06 16 4 60

M.Tech (Artificial Intelligence) 18 18 06 16 4 62

M.Tech (Computer Science and Engineering) 18 18 06 16 4 62

M.Tech (Bioscience and Bioengineering) 18 17 06 16 4 61

M.Tech (Chemical Engineering) 17 17 6 16 4 60

M.Tech (Intelligent VLSI Systems) 20 16 6 16 4 62

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

PC SSE ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech (Infrastructure Engineering with Specialization in

Environmental Engineering)

3 17 17 3 16 4 60

M.Tech (Civil and Infrastructure Engineering with Major in

Energy)

3 17 17 3 16 4 60

Program Minimum Credits to be earned

MC MSC ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech is pg (Robotics and Mobility Systems) 18 9 7 6 16 4 60

12.5 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. - M.Tech. Dual Degree

Minimum credit requirements for M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree is cumulative sum of credit
requirements for respective M.Sc. program and M.Tech. program as mentioned in Sections 12.3
and 12.4.

M.Tech (Data and Computational Sciences) 20 15 06 16 4 61

M.Tech (Intelligent Communication Systems) 20 16 6 16 4 62

M.Tech (Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality) 19 15 6 16 4 60

12.6 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree

Course categories and academic requirements for MTech - PhD dual degree students are given
below in Table 12.5.

Table 12.5 Minimum Credits to be earned for dual degree MTech and PhD students

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

MC ME MO MP NG Total

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned

PC SSE ME MO MP NG Total

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Infrastructure Engineering
with Specialization in Environmental Engineering)

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Civil and Infrastructure

Engineering with Major in Energy)

The DRC/IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during

Bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses.

12.7 Academic Credit Requirements for Ph.D. Students

The minimum credits to be earned through courses, is listed in Table 12.6.

Table 12.6 Credit Requirements for PhD students

S.No. Ph.D. in With Minimum Credits
through Course

Work

Minimum Credits
through Thesis

Work

1. Engineering
discipline

M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc.
(Engineering) in an Engineering
discipline

12 48

M.Sc. degree in a Science
discipline

24 48

B.Tech. , B.E. or B.Sc.
(Engineering) in an Engineering
discipline

24 48

2. Science, Humanities
or Social Science
discipline

M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in
a Science, Humanities or Social

Science discipline

12 48

3 17 17 03 20 4 64

3 17 17 03 20 4 64

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Sensors and Internet of Things) 19 17 03 20 4 63

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Cyber Physical System) 18 18 03 20 4 63

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Communication and Signal Processing) 17 17 03 20 4 61

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Thermofluids Engineering) 17 17 03 20 4 61

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Materials Engineering) 16 18 03 20 4 61

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Computer Science and Engineering) 18 18 03 20 4 63

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Artificial Intelligence) 18 18 03 20 4 63

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Bioscience and Bioengineering) 18 17 03 20 4 62

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Intelligent Communication Systems) 20 16 03 20 4 63

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Advanced Manufacturing) 19 15 03 20 4 61

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Mechanical Design) 19 15 03 20 4 61

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Data and Computational Sciences) 20 15 03 20 4 62

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Chemical Engineering) 17 17 03 20 4 61

The indicative maximum credits, a student registers in a semester, are notional. In addition to the
above minimum credit requirements through coursework, Ph. D. students are further required to
complete four compulsory non-graded (NG) courses before the open seminar. A student already
completed a NG course as part of his/her program need not register for the same course again.

The coursework requirements for IDRP Ph.D. students will be in line with Table 12.6.

While securing the minimum overall CGPA requirement in 12 (Ph.D. in departmental domains)/ 24
(Ph.D. in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline/direct Ph.D.) earned credits, a
course repeat process may be allowed for a maximum of 4 credits for Ph.D. students in
departmental domains and 8 credits for Ph.D. students in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a

Science discipline or for students enrolled in direct Ph.D. programme. The student can repeat
course(s) within the said credit limit in which he has obtained a pass grade but performance is
poor (secured grade is B- or lower). No replacement of course(s) in which the student has
secured pass grade and above is allowed. If the student opts to repeat a course, then the grade
secured in the next attempt will prevail.

12.8 Academic Performance Requirements

12.8.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program

The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given
below in Table 12.7.

Table 12.7 Minimum CGPA requirements

Sr.

No.

Program Continuation in Programme
(SGPA)

For graduation

1 M.Sc. (only graduation
requirement)

Refer 12.8.2 5.0

2 M.Tech. 5.0 5.0

3 Dual Degree (M.Sc. and

M.Tech.)

5.0 5.0

4 Dual Degree (M.Tech. and

Ph.D.)

6.5 (For first semester >=6) 7.0

5 Ph.D. 6.5 (For first semester >=6) 7.5 at completion of course
work

12.8.2 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for Ph.D. students

A PhD student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA
less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average
(DGPA) where DGPA is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum
number of credits.

12.8.3 Continuing criteria for M.Sc.

M.Sc.- The student must earn at least 20 credits at the end of second semester for continuation in
the program.

12.8.4 Minimum performance for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship

The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship is given in below for b.tech ug students 

Table 12.8

Table 12.8 Minimum CGPA requirements for Continuation of Assistantship/Fellowship

Sr. No. Program Continuation of Assistantship/

Fellowship

1 M.Tech. 6.0

2 Dual Degree (M.Tech. and Ph.D.) 6.5

3 Ph.D. 6.5

13. LEAVE RULES

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with a
medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of
the DRC.

13.1 Leave

A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid semester
break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter term or
mid-semester break.

A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch

An M.Tech /M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch

The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC
without assistantship during that period.

13.2 Other Leaves

Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MoE. It will not be
counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme.

Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MoE.

13.3 Semester Withdrawal

May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of
four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.

In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for
only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of Academics
regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it
can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on medical
ground will not be counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme for the
student.

13.4 Academic Leave

Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as

1. Field work

2. Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library

3. Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ

4. Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium

5. Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision

6. Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as
indicated in his research proposal

7. Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with sister institution in India or
abroad

All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is
granted. SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship
during academic leave.
● A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave.
● A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as
certified by SRC and approved by DRC.

14. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted
under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following:

14.1 M.Sc. Program

Merit-cum-Means fellowship as per Institute norms.

14.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program

A student having completed minimum credit requirements of a M.Sc. program at the end of
second year with
a. CGPA>=8

OR
b. have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.

14.3 M.Tech Program

A regular M.Tech student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A
student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.

14.4 Executive M Tech Program

Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the

Institute.

14.5 M.Tech – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program

Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with
regular Ph.D. students.

14.6 Ph.D. Program

A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the
norms of IIT Jodhpur.
a. A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with

GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD norms.
b. The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech. or equivalent
post-Bachelor’s degree
c. A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.

A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided
the student has met the qualifier requirement. Enhanced fellowship will commence from the
date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing
the qualifier requirement. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the above
requirements.

The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student will continue till thesis Defense or end of
the semester in which he/she has submitted thesis, whichever is earlier. The above is permissible
subject to assistantship/fellowship available in the semester under question as per

MHRD/CSIR/DST/UGC rule.

15. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND EVALUATION OF M.TECH. / M.SC. PROJECT

● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).

● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first
semester.

● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to regular
supervisor(s).

● Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee
consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research
with at least one-member external to the department (may be outside the Institute also).

DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. Same committee may
examine more than one thesis. The external member can be on VC. DRC will ensure that
the Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.

● A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer
semester following 2
nd semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech
project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be
evaluated by his supervisor.

16. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PH.D. /M. TECH. PH.D. DUAL DEGREE

PROGRAM

16.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)

16.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates

The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research.

There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the
candidate at the time of selection.

16.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)

● Ph.D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be
assigned at the time of selection.

● Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).

● For both Ph. D. and M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification
must be completed by the end of the first semester.

● The Convener, DRC (Department Research and Postgraduate Committee)/Coordinator,

IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Program Committee) would advise until the student is
assigned to regular supervisor(s).
● There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional
supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.
● A supervisor from outside the institute, before qualifier, may be appointed on the
request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean
(Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.
● The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and

Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial
point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor.

16.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the

DRC/IRC shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the
student to take care of the administrative requirements.

● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an
additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor.

● The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the
supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.

● The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as supervisor and
will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared the qualifier
before supervisor’s retirement/resignation.

16.1.4 Composition of Departmental Research Committee (DRC)

The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs of
the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed by
the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by a Professor/Associate Professor nominated by the Head of
the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The

DRC has to be approved by the Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the
convenor of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years.

16.1.5 Composition of Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC)

The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the
chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a
member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure
for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics).

16.2 Change of Research Supervisor

Change of supervisor(s) under exceptional circumstances shall be permitted by Dean
(Academics) on recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of
(i) the student (ii) the present supervisor(s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s).

If required, realignment of student’s research program will happen under supervision of the

DRC/IRC.

16.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)

16.3.1 Composition of SRC
● The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members
conversant with the field of research with at least one-member external to the
department (may be outside the Institute also).
● A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the
supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by the Dean (Academics).
● The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and
the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean
(Academics).
● The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
● Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through
the DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record.
● The SRC and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the
thesis.
● The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the
completion of the program.

16.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)

Academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the SRC and
peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii) A Poster

Presentation open to all. SRC will award Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based upon (i) and
(ii). Two consecutive non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration.

For implementational convenience, the academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for
conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following groupings of students and
scheduling guidelines are suggested

BTech students complete eight semesters of coursework over four years.
PhD students complete their programme over a period of four to five years.

Each semester in the BTech programme includes lectures, labs, and examinations.
Each year of the PhD programme includes research milestones and progress reviews.

BTech progress is evaluated semester by semester through continuous assessment.
PhD progress is evaluated year by year through annual review committees.

The first semester of BTech covers foundational mathematics and basic sciences.
The first year of PhD involves compulsory coursework and selection of a research area.

BTech students register for courses every semester before the academic term begins.
PhD students submit an annual progress report to the doctoral committee every year.

A BTech student must clear all semester examinations to be eligible for the degree.
A PhD student must pass the qualifying examination in the first year of the programme.

1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working

Date of September of every year for b.tech ug students

2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working

Date of February of every year

The first APM will be conducted after successful completion of qualifier requirements. Those
students who have got 6 months extension to complete qualifier requirements, for them APM
can be scheduled even after a semester from the date of completion of qualifier
requirements. Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be
reported by supervisor(s) through the SRC for record.

Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and
approved by Dean (academics)

16.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student

The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a

Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.

1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 12.8.1

2. Cleared comprehensive examination

3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research

4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal

The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and in any
case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the Ph. D.
program. 

Part-time and direct Ph.D. candidates will need to complete qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the seventh semester. M.Tech.-Ph.D. candidates will need to complete
qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester and in any case not later than
the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the program. For M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual
degree students, the 16 credits associated with the M.Tech. project II are to be converted to the RP.

UG students enrolled in BTech programmes follow a semester-based curriculum.

PG students enrolled in MTech programmes undertake advanced coursework and thesis work.

16.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student
● The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the
student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the
field of research.
● The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination

Committee of the Department/IDRP.
● The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.
● Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting the comprehensive examination.

Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. Course
content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and Senate. The
syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses
offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in
that area.

● The SRC will specify a set of three papers as comprehensive requirements for a particular
student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.
● The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student
within two weeks of SRC formation.

● All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can
coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may
decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.

● A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed
the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.

● If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first
attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear during
the next scheduled comprehensive examination as per the academic calendar. For valid
medical or unforeseen reasons, if a student is not able to register for the comprehensive
examination, the comprehensive examination may be rescheduled within that semester
with prior approval to the Dean/Associate Dean (PG Programs).

● For clearing the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all
papers.

Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:

● Ph.D.: within 3 semesters
● Direct Ph.D. and Part-Time Ph.D.: within 5 semesters

16.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)

Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State of

Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area.

The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory grade in

SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal. The State of the Art
seminar must be completed before finalization of the research proposal. For M.Tech.-Ph.D.
students, the presentation in M.Tech. Project I will be considered as SOTA.

16.5.3 Research Proposal

Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion
of SOTA. The Research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to
research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the
candidate.

16.6 Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree

A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D.
degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such students
who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis.

The time-lines for comprehensive examination, state of the art seminar and candidacy
examination are summarized in Table 12.9 .

Table 12.9 Timelines for comprehensive examination, state of the art seminar and candidacy
examination

Sr. No. Ph.D. (Regular) Ph.D. (Part-time) Ph.D. (Direct) M.Tech.-Ph.D.

Comprehensive

Examination

3 Semesters 5 Semesters 5 Semesters 3 Semesters

State-of-the-Art

Seminar for b.tech ug students 

3 Semesters 5 Semesters 5 Semesters 3 Semesters

Candidacy

Examination

4 Semesters 6 Semesters 6 Semesters 4 Semesters

16.7 Relaxation in M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program
● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier
requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also
convert into part-time/external Ph.D. students and exit with M.Tech degree if all
conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.
● The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if

SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends continuance of registration.

16.8 Cancellation of Registration
● The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC or
who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.
● The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the
maximum permissible period specified in Section 11.5 will be liable for cancellation.

16.9 Synopsis
● Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal close door
assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC.
● The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied about the quality and
quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.
● Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis
report.
● Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar
date. If required, an extension of three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics)
on the recommendation of SRC.
● If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be
asked to present the synopsis again.
● On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in

4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis, the
student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in the
required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for
consideration of the SRC.
● The student should have at least two publications in Scopus indexed journals and/or A+
conferences for Engineering and Science Departments. Requirements for the

Department of Humanities and School of Management & Entrepreneurship will be
specified separately.

16.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation

The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty Members
from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in which the
student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, following guidelines should be followed
● The examiners shall have at least 6 years Post-Ph.D. experience;
● No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and
● The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.
● Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners.
● The Chairman, Senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of
which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these
examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. In addition, the SRC and

Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.
● The Indian examiners shall attend in person the Thesis Defense.
● The examiners shall submit a written report on the Thesis within a period of two months
from the date of receipt of the Thesis.
● If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.
● If any of the examiners rejects the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration.

The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special
circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.
program.
● If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be
awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the

Ph.D. program.

● If an examiner suggests revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis after
the revision within a prescribed time period of 6 months in consultation with the

Supervisor(s).
● When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the

Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the
suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the

Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.
● The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within India
and other Faculty Members, who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the
student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their
recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to the Senate, to consider the
award of Ph.D. degree to the student.

BTech students complete eight semesters of coursework over four years.
PhD students complete their programme over a period of four to five years.

Each semester in the BTech programme includes lectures, labs, and examinations.
Each year of the PhD programme includes research milestones and progress reviews.

BTech progress is evaluated semester by semester through continuous assessment.
PhD progress is evaluated year by year through annual review committees.

The first semester of BTech covers foundational mathematics and basic sciences.
The first year of PhD involves compulsory coursework and selection of a research area.

BTech students register for courses every semester before the academic term begins.
PhD students submit an annual progress report to the doctoral committee every year.

A BTech student must clear all semester examinations to be eligible for the degree.
A PhD student must pass the qualifying examination in the first year of the programme.

17. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation, if she/he has met the
requirements laid down in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4 below.

17.1 Minimum Residential Requirement

Table 17.1 Minimum residential requirement

S.No. Program Qualifications at the time of joining the

Program for b.tech ug students

Minimum Duration (in
semesters) of Residence

1. M.Sc. All qualifying degrees 4

2. M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual

Degree

All qualifying degrees 7

3. M.Tech. Programs

Full-time Regular
/Sponsored

All qualifying degrees 3

Part-time/ Part-time

Executive

All qualifying degrees 0

Executive All qualifying degrees 1

4. Ph. D. Programs

Engineering discipline M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an

Engineering discipline

2

M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline 5

B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) in an

Engineering discipline

5

Science, Humanities or

Social Science discipline

M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a

Science, Humanities or Social Science
discipline

2

Part-time All qualifying degrees 0

External All qualifying degrees 1

17.2 Academic

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned
the minimum credits as per Section 12.3 for M. Sc., Section 12.4 for M. Tech., Section 12.5 for M.

Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 12.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 12.7 for Ph.D.,
while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 12.8.

17.3 No Dues Clearance

The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as
deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).

17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if
there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.

17.5 Award of Degrees

17.5.1 Provisional Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can be
provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman,

Senate.

17.5.2 Degree Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is
recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate
degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its
approval.

17.6 Withdrawal of Degree

Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation
requirements is detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors
for withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student.

18. AMENDMENTS

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the
right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes
at IIT-Jodhpur.

Any faculty member at AIIMS/IIT Jodhpur holding fulltime position can be
designated as Supervisor.
• Faculty members of IIT and AIIMS can supervise Ph.D. students as per the
regulations of respective institute.
• The faculty member who himself/herself is registered for Ph.D. programme will not
be eligible for the supervision of Ph.D.
• There will be at-least one supervisor each from both AIIMS Jodhpur and IIT

Jodhpur. A maximum of three supervisors are allowed.
• External supervisor with at least two years of post-graduate teaching experience/2
years post PhD research experience as medical/non-medical
researcher/scientist/faculty member may be appointed as supervisor provided
he/she has original/significant research contribution in the field.

1. Qualifier Requirement and plan for thesis work

For the dual degree:

Step 1: After 1st semesterThe candidate has to identify the need from immersion+ problem definition
emphasizing scope for innovation and development

Step 2: After 4th Semester and by 5th SemesterSOTA seminar + detailed presentation on scientific challenges and innovation model
of the identified problem

Step 3: After 6th Semester and by 7th Semester

Present translation agenda and/or business plan

Step 4: After 7th Semester

To take a call while presenting, whether to opt for degree with translational
component/ product development

OR

Opt for incubation with a business plan

For Ph.D. degree:
• Step 1: After 1st Semester
• The candidate has to identify the need from immersion+ problem definition
emphasizing scope for innovation and development
• Step 2: By end of 2nd Semester
• Present foundation of the identified problem of product development
• Step 3: By end of 3rd Semester
• Present SOTA seminar

3
• Step 4: By end of 4th Semester
• Present complete plan for translation/prototyping the device
• Step 5: By end of 7th Semester
• To take a call while presenting, whether to opt for degree with translational
component /product development

 OR
• Opt for incubation with a business plan

Assessment of the work of the candidates
• Annual progress work during the thesis work shall be assessed by the Doctoral
committee and a report will be submitted to the Dean through the supervisor.
• The doctoral committee will be formed after 1st Semester and before end of second
semester

Thesis and examination
• The thesis will be submitted after an open seminar presented by the candidate and
the approval of the Doctoral committee.
• At least two patents (or equivalent IP right document) filed is essential for
submitting the thesis.
• Each candidate shall submit four print copies and pdf format of the thesis duly
certified by the Supervisor and the Co-Supervisor(s) for evaluation after completion
of the required period.
• A panel of examiners shall be submitted before the expected date of submission of
the thesis, by the supervisor, in consultation with the Doctoral committee. The
panel shall include eight examiners who are experts in the field of the study
undertaken by the candidate (three of these shall be from abroad).
• The supervisors may go for the consent of the examiners before proposing the
names in the examiner list.
• In the thesis evaluation form, the points of judgment of the thesis can be the
novelty/contribution of the product development/translation
• After approval of thesis by the external and the internal examiners the viva voce
examination will be held to adjudge the proficiency of the candidate in the
subject(s) allied to the candidate’s field of work.
• If the thesis is rejected by more than one examiner, it will stand rejected and shall
not be referred to any other examiner. However, in the event the thesis is rejected
by only one examiner, it will be referred to another examiner from among the
approved panel. In case the thesis is approved by this examiner, it will be
considered as unanimously approved, else the respective Chairman, Senate may
advise course of action.

Teaching activities at IIT Jodhpur are primarily aimed at students enrolled in degree programmes.
Research activities at IIT Jodhpur are primarily carried out by scholars and research fellows.

Faculty members engage in teaching to train students in core engineering and science disciplines.
Faculty members engage in research to mentor scholars working on cutting-edge problems.

The institute supports teaching by providing students with well-equipped classrooms and labs.
The institute supports research by providing scholars with funded projects and laboratory access.

4
• If one or more examiner recommends re-submission/modification of thesis, the
same shall be done within a maximum period of six months from the date of
intimation to the candidate.
• If the report from all the external examiners is not received within three months,
a copy of thesis will be sent to another examiner from amongst the approved panel.
• The thesis
• defense will be conducted in the presence of Doctoral committee and one of the
external examiners who has examined the thesis.

Credit Requirements for the Ph.D. degree
• Candidates enrolled in PhD, other than through Master’s programme : Compulsory
courses of Master’s Programme + 6 Elective Credits (Thesis 48)
• Candidates through Master’s programme —6 Elective Credits (Thesis 48)

Result
(a)If the Examiners are not satisfied with the performance of the candidate in the
above examination, the candidate will have to reappear for another viva vice
examination after a period of two months provided such specific
recommendation is made by the board of Examiners.
(b)The candidate shall be declared eligible for the award of the Degree of Doctor
of Philosophy only on the unanimous recommendations of the members of the

Board of Examiners at the viva voce examination.

Award of Degree:

The transcript will be issued by the institute in which the candidate will be registered. The
degree will be awarded jointly by AIIMS Jodhpur and IIT Jodhpur in alternate

Convocations.

The degree certificate will be issued and signed by competent authorities from both the Institutes. 

he Senate in its 38th meeting held on 26th June 2024 vide resolution number 38.2.6 approved to conduct one Minor and one Major examination for evaluation in all Academic

Programs.

The evaluation scheme approved by the Senate for all Academic Programs is as under:

1. The Minor Examination will occur around the midpoint of the Semester to evaluate

Students' progress and to offer prompt feedback on their academic performance. The

Minor examination will be a written examination for 2 hours.

2. The Major Examination will take place at the end of the Semester to assess students'
thorough grasp of the concepts taught throughout the Semester. The Major
examination will encompass the entire syllabus and assess learning across the entire
course.

The Major examination will be a written examination with a weightage not less than

40% of the overall evaluation. The duration of the major examination will be 3 hours.

The examinations from Academic Year 2024-25 Semester -I onwards would be
decentralized where the office of Academics would provide the examination calendar, venue details, and examination copies. The Faculty Members would
conduct examinations with the support of their Teaching Assistant (TA) and prepare
seating arrangements.

Instructors will determine the weightage of Minor examination and other
components of continuous evaluation.

All the Faculty Members shall share the course evaluation scheme with the students
at least two days before the very first day of the Class, in the First Course Handout
(FCH).

This policy supersedes the earlier policy regarding evaluation in totality

Welcome to Department of Chemistry & Head's Message

A warm welcome to the Department of Chemistry at IIT Jodhpur, which was established in 2015. Since the inception, the department has taken major strides forward in teaching, research and technology development. Our department offers a variety of academic programs including M.Sc. (2 Years), M.Sc. (Chemistry)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) with Specialization, BS in Chemistry with Specialization (4 years), and Ph.D. programs. We also provide core and elective courses in chemistry and related fields for undergraduate B.Tech. engineering students. The department offers Chemistry courses for 4-year Integrated B.Sc.-B.Ed. Program (ITEP), which is in alignment with NEP 2020 to support teacher preparation and foster professional development.

Besides teaching, the Department is striving to be acknowledged for excellence in research and technology. Our goal is to foster an environment where everyone can thrive, reach their full potential, and contribute to cutting-edge scientific advancements. We have the latest state of the art basic teaching laboratories and several thematic research laboratories. Our current faculty strength is 19 and they are carrying out research activities in all major areas of chemical sciences, namely, organic synthesis and catalysis, chemical biology, main group chemistry and organometallics, nanomaterials, spectroscopy and chemical dynamics, biophysical chemistry and computational chemistry. The cutting-edge research in the thrust areas by our faculty members are published in international peer-reviewed journals of well-repute. In short IIT Jodhpur Chemistry department is where Chemistry meets Technology through Collaboration, Communication and Cooperation. I encourage the future aspirants to get enrolled at IIT Jodhpur and wish you all the very best in your future endeavours. Thank you.

B.S. in Chemistry with Specialization
An Engineering linked Undergraduate Program

This undergraduate program has been designed to transmit fundamental knowledge in basic science and engineering during the first few semesters, which develops critical analytical thinking and forms the basis of diverse skill sets used by scientists and engineers to innovate, design, and develop technologies for the future. Students undergo comprehensive training in advanced concepts of chemistry for the next two years. The inclusion of a substantial component of courses from other science and engineering departments makes the program quite interdisciplinary in nature. The final year of the curriculum is designed towards specialization in a focused area. The flexibility of opting for different specializations is ingrained in formulating the structure and curriculum of the programme. During these years, the students get to experience the joys and rigors of original research currently being pursued and consider a variety of career paths through capability-linked specializations of their choice. In the specialization, emphasis is given to the emerging areas in Chemistry to meet societal and industrial needs, and ever-growing sustainability demands. The graduating students of this program shall be equipped with requisite skill-sets required to assume leadership positions in the different sectors of industry, further their career in higher studies, or embark on entrepreneurial ventures to address present day unmet challenges of the country.

We Offer
 Objectives

    To equip new generation aspiring minds with engineering linked chemical science skill sets enabling them to opt for challenging career paths at various levels of academia and industry

    To impart education towards understanding of the concepts of chemical science, basic engineering, and allied areas enabling the students to tackle societal problems through an interdisciplinary approach

    To integrate analytical and computational abilities with experimental skills to create individuals competent in professional science practices

    To facilitate and promote entry into research at an early stage through a flexible and border less curriculum

    To inculcate an attitude towards commitment to scientific ethics, leadership qualities, entrepreneurship, and professional development for the future generation

    To instill the approach of collaborative research between academia and industry targeting sustainability.



Opportunities

    P. C. Ray Fellowship of Rs. 50,000 for every semester if a student continues to maintain CGPA 8.0 every semester.

    Fully paid international conference/internship of two months duration during summer term.

Learning Outcomes

    Acquire strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry as well as other branches of basic science and engineering. 

    Apply the concepts of science and basic engineering to analyze and design complex novel materials, and molecular complexes having potential applications to society.

    Develop skills on hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and experimental data handling to tackle scientific problems.

    Perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.

    Develop communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, seminars and workshops on manuscript / patent writing / presentation skills.

    Value of team work and group discussion in problem solving, and time management to continue co-curricular activities without compromising academics.

    To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.

Graduate Attributes

    Strong understanding of fundamentals of science and engineering with emphasis on chemical science.

    A strong foundation in the analytical, experimental, and computational methods to study various aspects of chemical science.

    Foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse cross-disciplines.

    Ability to acquire new knowledge, integrate in the existing paradigm, and innovate solutions as per the requirement. 

    Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for the development of important chemical products such as pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics, etc. 

    Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumentation methods for interdisciplinary research areas. 

    Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical processes, molecular structures and advanced materials.

    Ability to comprehend, write, and present scientific articles and technical reports.

    Ability to engage in ethical and responsible practices while pursuing professional growth.


Post Graduate Program
Introduction

The Department of Chemistry hosts a two-year M.Sc. Chemistry   (Download file 1033 KB) Program in Chemistry. The primary objective of M.Sc. Chemistry program at IIT Jodhpur is to bring out professionals with the fundamental knowledge and skill sets of various aspects of Chemistry. The program comprises a strong collection of courses spanning among organic, inorganic, physical, and theoretical chemistry with associated laboratory and hands-on sessions to provide practical knowledge. As part of the M.Sc. program, students carry out one major and one minor research project under the guidance of the faculty members of the department to get an exposure to the modern research going on in various subdomains of chemistry.

Objective of the Programme

The major objective of the program is to bring out professionals having fundamental knowledge, and specific skill sets of various aspects of chemistry such as Organic Reactions and their Mechanism, Main-Group and Transition Metals, Organometallics and Catalysis, Physical and Spectroscopic techniques, Inorganic and Solid State Material synthesis, Computational and Theoretical Chemistry. The department focuses on preparing future students to take up challenges at various levels of academics, R&Ds and industries.
Expected Graduate Attributes

    Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for development of important chemical products such as pharmaceutical drugs, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics etc
    Ability to use characterization tools for analysing reactions and monitoring chemical processes for product development
    Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumental methods for interdisciplinary research areas
    Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical processes, molecular structures and advanced materials
    Ability to comprehend, write and present scientific articles and technical reports
    Develop oral and written communication skills
    Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics and sense of intellectual integrity
    Ability to plan and manage technical research projects and work in a team


Learning Outcomes

    Strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry
    Develop appreciation of hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and experimental data handling skills to solve scientific problems to address technological challenges in various domains
    Knowledge of computational and theoretical chemistry
    Skills for material synthesis and processes for device integration
    Develop the ability to exercise independent learning, thinking and problem solving skills
    Develop the ability to interact in a cross-cultural environment and acquire time and project management skills for carrying out guided research work in any of the research areas related to science and technology
    Develop skills to communicate scientific learning and present ideas

 

Duration: 2 years 

Proposed Intake: 38 (including EWS)

Eligibility: JAM (Chemistry) qualified candidates will be considered as per the existing norms of M.Sc. programs.  

Faculty Coordinator: Prof. Ananya Debnath (Email: ananya@iitj.ac.in)


Doctoral Program
Introduction

The department of chemistry hosts Ph.D. program in Chemistry.  The objective of the program is to provide unique opportunities and a vibrant environment to the motivated researchers to perform research in both fundamental and applied areas of chemistry. Our PhD program provides opportunities to students in a wide array of chemical disciplines including Computational Molecular Biophysics and Gas-Phase Reaction Dynamics, Quantum Information Processing, Biophysical Chemistry using fluorescence spectroscopy and NMR,  Nanomaterials & Nanodevices, Advanced Materials Chemistry,  Asymmetric Catalysis, Natural Products & Medicinally Active Compounds Synthesis, Catalysis for Energy, Environment Remidiation, Water and Soil Chemistry, Asymmetric and Homogeneous Catalysis, Synthesis of Organic Compounds, Alternative Biofuels, Main-group Organometallic Chemistry. 

PhD students have the freedom to choose their courses and research topics for thesis research. Moreover, we encourage graduate students to rotate in several different labs for first semester while taking the courses under guidance of Department Research Committee (DRC). PhD students have many opportunities for professional development, including teaching, communication, networking, outreach, and participation in regional, national, and international conferences and meetings. They are also part of departmental committees such as seminars, classes etc. These activities, together with research, make our students competitive for many career paths that include academia, industry, government, and national laboratories, among others. The institute offers unique opportunity to a PhD student to avail one-year fellowship for any translational activities related to the thesis upon submission. The patent-landscaping being an integral part of the research plan and PhD curriculum at IIT Jodhpur is another unique feature.


IMPORTANT NOTE:

Rolling Advertisement for Admission to Ph.D. Programs


    Link to fill online application form
    For further information, click here
    For information about research areas, Applicants are strongly advised to visit the webpages of faculty members


Contact us

    Issues related to online application: office_academics_pg@iitj.ac.in
    Issues related to payments: oa_automation@iitj.ac.in
    Details about PhD program: office_chemistry@iitj.ac.in

Watch/follow/connect: Facebook/ Twitter


Note: Students can apply for PhD position throughout the year...

Interviews for prospective doctoral students are held twice during the year (May and December) following which they can join from the semester beginning after getting accepted. Candidates get enrolled to the department and take course work in consultation with the Department Research Committee and Faculty Advisor and generally start their research work under the respective faculty member from the second semester. Doctoral students are also engaged in Teaching Assistantship (TA) duties in supervising undergraduate laboratories and courses.


Students enrolled in PhD program of Department, may contact DRC:

DRC Chairman: Prof. Sandip Murarka

DRC Convenor and Ph.D. Program Coordinator: Prof. Rakesh Kumar Sharma

DRC member and M.Sc. Program Coordinator: Prof. Ananya Debnath

 Biography

Dr. Murarka pursued his PhD from WWU Münster under the supervision of Prof. Armido Studer. After completing his Ph.D. (2013), he worked as a Max-Planck postdoctoral research fellow in the laboratory of Prof. Herbert Waldmann at Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Dortmund (2013-2016). Following a year-long stay (2016-2017) as a Team Leader in a reputed pharmaceutical company, Syngene International Limited, he decided to return to academia. In May 2017, he joined the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India, as an Assistant Professor and was promoted to the post of Associate Professor in June 2022.

He is a recipient of the prestigious ‘Institute Senior Researcher Award (Science Category)’ by IIT Jodhpur, ‘The Early Career Research Award’ by SERB, Government of India, ‘The Thieme Chemistry Journal Award’ by Thieme, and ‘The Merck Young Scientist Award’ by Merck. He is an Early Career Advisory Board Member (ECAB) of several journals, such as ChemistrySelect (Wiley-VCH), Chemistry an Asian Journal (Wiley-VCH), and Organic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC). He is also a Fellow of the Indian Chemical Society (FICS) and a Member of the Royal Society of Chemistry (MRSC).

Research

Sandip Murarka
Dr. Murarka’s current research activities include the study of novel activation modes and the development of chemoselective and sustainable synthetic transformations. His research group utilizes sustainable chemical tools, such as base-metal catalysis, photocatalysis, and electro-organic synthesis, to convert feedstock chemicals to value-added compounds and pharmaceutically relevant molecular architectures. The thrust areas of research in his group include:

    Radical Chemistry
    Photoinduced Synthetic Transformations
    Electrochemistry in Organic Synthesis
    Transition Metal Catalyzed Cross-Couplings
    C-H Functionalizations
    Medicinal Chemistry

Rakesh Kumar Sharma
 About us

We are a diverse group of chemists and material scientists specializing in catalysis, feed-stock chemistry, energy harvesting and storage, environmental remediation and fuels. Our goal is to understand fundamental chemical processes and also to develop highly efficient materials inspired by nature. We develop simple, reproducible and scalable methods for sustainable science. The research undertaken in our group is intended to have far lasting implications to utilize and design materials for applications that are required by a booming technology minding the effect on the environment. We nurture philosophy of collaboration expedites new discoveries and innovations. We engage with, international universities, inter-institutional, numerous government agencies and industries to harvest the benefits of our research work for end-users.

Samanwita Pal

Biography

Dr. Samanwita Pal is an NMR spectroscopist and a Professor at the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur. She earned a BSc. (Hons.) from Jadavpur University and a MSc degree in Chemistry from IIT Madras. She further received her PhD in small molecule NMR and NQR spectroscopy from IIT Madras in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. N. Chandrakumar. She pursued her postdoctoral fellowship in the group of Prof. Stephan Grzesiek at Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland during 2010-2012. She joined the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur in 2012 December as an Assistant Professor. Currently she is continuing as a Professor at the Department of Chemistry.

Dr. Pal received Ratna Rao Memorial prize and Dr. S. R. Ramadas 60th Birthday Commemoration award for best academic record in Chemistry during the period 2002-2004. She earned the prestigious Prof Langmuir Prize for best PhD Thesis in Physical and Theoretical Chemistry from IIT Madras in 2010. She has served as an elected Executive Committee member of the National Magnetic Resonance Society, India from March 2021 for a period of three years. She has published several articles in reputed journals and presented her findings in numerous national and international meetings as an invited speaker.

Research

Dr. Pal is working in small molecule solution-state and solid-state NMR and NQR for past two decades. Her research interest at present focusses on design and application of NMR methods to decipher molecular dynamics and interactions relevant in a variety of areas ranging from energy, environment to defence and medicine. Her research group utilizes the 500 MHz WB NMR spectrometer from the central facility and a 20 MHz Time Domain (TD) NMR spectrometer housed in her research laboratory. The research group majorly implements NMR relaxation, diffusion and magnetization transfer methods. Some of the current thrust areas the group is working in are as follows:

    NMR relaxometry, diffusometry and Cryoporometry
    Small molecule solution state magnetization transfer and correlation experiments
    NMR Solid state ion dynamics in porous materials
    NMR chemical exchange in condensed phase
    NQR detection and instrumentation
    Pulse sequence design and modification 

Ramesh K Metre
Biography

Dr. Ramesh K. Metre received his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras and obtained his Ph.D. from the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India, in 2014 under the supervision of Professor V. Chandrasekhar. He had a brief stint of postdoctoral studies at NISER Bhubaneshwar and KAUST, SA. In 2016, he joined as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India. He is currently serving as an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur.

He is recipient of many awards and recognitions such as, Teaching Excellence Award 2023, IIT Jodhpur, Senior Researcher Award (Science) 2025, IIT Jodhpur and Early Carrier Research Award, SERB, DST.  he has published several articles in reputed journals and presented his research work in various national and international meetings as an invited speaker

Research

The synthesis and study of redox-active ligands and their metal complexes represent a frontier in molecular materials chemistry. Our current research interests include the design, synthesis and structure of novel redox-active multinuclear transition as well as main group organometallic compounds with application in molecular materials for Resistive Random Access Memory and Electrochemical devices. 

Koushambi Mitra


Biography

Koushambi Mitra obtained her bachelor's degree in chemistry from Presidency College, University of Calcutta (2006-2009). Mitra then joined as an integrated MS-PhD student at the Indian Institute of Science and developed platinum complexes as light activated DNA crosslinking and anticancer agents (2009-2016). Thereafter, Mitra did a series of brief postdoctoral stints (Virginia Commonwealth University, 2016-2018; and the University of Texas at Dallas, 2018-2020) where she switched her research interests to organic synthesis and chemical biology. She developed unique photocages for cancer drug delivery and activity-based sensors for detection of enzymatic activity in living neuronal cells. In her last postdoc at the University of Chicago (2020-2024), she developed ratiometric sensors for quantitative imaging of organellar sodium ions. Currently, Mitra is an assistant professor in the department of chemistry at IIT Jodhpur (July, 2024) where her research interests lie in the highly interdisciplinary areas of chemical biology.

Research

We are developing cutting-edge chemical technologies to understand the biochemical and chemical environment of organelles. Our main approach is to enable the chemistry done in reaction vessels to occur in a much complex cellular milieu. Though substantial advances have been made to understand the cell as a whole entity, we still lack probes and methods to study biological processes specifically in organelles in living system as a function of time. To meet this dire need, we are designing and developing chemical platforms which will allow us to map and correlate organelles based on morphological and functional properties.

The ongoing projects of our research group are:

1. Developing organelle-targeted fluorescent probes for physiological ions and metabolites and study them in the context of health and diseases

2. Developing activity-based chemical probes for detecting enzyme activities of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and reductive pathways

3. Developing biorthogonal and bioconjugation reactions for specific tagging of metabolites or proteins in the organelles


Dibyendu Kumar Sasmal

Biography

Dr. Dibyendu K. Sasmal is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, where he has been serving since July 2023, following his tenure as an Assistant Professor from 2019 to 2023. His academic journey began with a Bachelor of Science (Honors) in Chemistry from Medinipur College, Vidyasagar University, in 2005, followed by a Master of Science (M.Sc.) in Chemistry with a specialization in Physical Chemistry in 2007. He earned his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry in 2012 from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, under the guidance of Professor Kankan Bhattacharyya. Post-Ph.D., he conducted postdoctoral research at Bowling Green State University, Ohio, USA, with Professor H. Peter Lu, followed by research at the Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, under Professor Jun Huang, and later at the Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, Illinois, with Professor Tijana Rajh.

Research

Dr. Sasmal and his group is interested to understand complex interplay among structure, function, and dynamics of bio-molecules present either in condensed phase or cellular environment at single molecular level in real-time. Conventional ensemble methods can only give information related to molecular function which are average of property with respect to time. However, single-molecule spectroscopy has an unique capabilities for distinguishing molecular properties with spatiotemporal resolution of sub-nano meter and pico-seconds. Their approach is highly interdisciplinary combining molecular spectroscopy, molecular biology, optics and advanced fluorescence microscopy. The group is currently investigating the pattern of conformational dynamics of DNA, protein and RNA. They are also trying to understand how immune cells distinguish between self and foreign antigens at single molecule level in real time. Drug-protein interaction in condensed phase, and development of quantum dot based drug carrier, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) are also topic of research for this group. 

Ananya Debnath

Biography

Prof Debnath is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur. She joined IIT jodhpur as an assistant professor in 2013. Before joining Jodhpur, she worked as a post doctoral fellow in Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt, Germany in 2013 for a short duration. Prior to that she worked as a Max Planck post dostoral fellow at Max Planck Institute of Polymer Science, Mainz, Germany from 2009-2012. She was a research associate at Department of Chemical Engineering and Department of Physics in Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Bangalore from 2007-2009. She obtained her PhD from Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry from IISc Bangalore in 2008 under the supervision of Prof K. L. Sebastian.

 

Research

Prof Debnath’s current research broadly envisages on understanding of biological processes using principles of classical statistical mechanics. Her group uses modeling tools ranging from multi-scale modeling, molecular dynamics simulations combined with machine learning techniques to study the structure, thermodynamics and dynamics of proteins, lipids, water at the micro and meso-scale as well as the analytical theory at the macro-scale to investigate different processes involving biological chain and macromolecules.  The group is particularly interested in

    Water dynamics near soft and bio molecules
    Structure and Dynamics of Biological Membranes
    Trans-membrane and Peripheral Proteins
    Protein-Ligand Binding
    Dynamics and Reaction Rates of Activated Processes involving Polymers
    Glass Transitions and Dynamical Heterogeneity in Biomembranes
    Self-assembly of Bio-inspired Soft Materials 


Manikandan Paranjothy

Biography

Prof. Manikandan Paranjothy completed Ph.D. in 2009 from the department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, under the supervision of Prof. Srihari Keshavamurthy. He carried out three years of post-doctoral work in the research group of Prof. William L. Hase, at Texas Tech University, USA. He joined Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur in 2013 as Assistant Professor and became Associate Professor in 2019 and Professor in 2023. His research interests include chemical reaction dynamics, direct dynamics simulations of organic reactions, and reactions at heterogeneous interfaces. His research group is actively involved in developing machine learning based potential energy surfaces for performing reaction dynamics calculations.  

Research

Our broad research area is Theoretical and Computational Chemistry. In our research group, we use Quantum Chemistry and Classical Trajectory methods to study interesting chemical reactions occurring in Interstellar, Combustion, and Atmospheric Chemistry. Specific research topics are: 

* Unimolecular and Bimolecular Reaction Dynamics in Gas Phase

* Machine Learning Potentials for Classical Trajectory Simulations

* Direct Dynamics (on-the-fly) Trajectory Simulations 

* Electronic Structure Theory



About Research
Research Areas

    Department of Chemistry @IIT Jodhpur presently emphasizes on five primary research areas of Inorganic Chemistry, Organic Chemistry, Physical Chemistry, Material Chemistry and Computational Chemistry.
    The importance of the Department’s research in the real world is exemplified by our industrial collaborations.
    Faculty Members are involved in following major thrust areas:
Research Facilities

    The department of chemistry has taken major initiatives and played an active role in the setting up of advanced instrumentation facility for the Department as well as the Institute at Centre for Advanced Scientific Equipment.
    Some of the research facilities include a Differential Scanning Calorimeter, Simultaneous Thermal Analyser, Powder X-ray diffractometer, Single crystal X-ray diffractometer, Atomic Force Microscope (Park XE-70), Scanning Electron Microscope with Electron Dispersion Spectrometer, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer (500 MHz), UV-vis spectrometers, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Fluorescence spectrometer, Surface area analyzer (Physisorption and CHemisorption analysers), Dynacool-PPMS, SQUID, Raman spectrometer, Thermal Evaporator, Furnaces, Glove Box, Solar Simulator etc.

Ongoing Projects
Some of the prominent on-going Sponsored Research Projects include:

1. Multiparticle Entanglement, Nonlocality and Quantum Information processing- Analysing the role and applications of statistical correlations Core Research Grant,

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Atul Kumar, PI (2019-22)

Project Description:

For bi-partite or multi qubit systems, the distinction between quantum and classical resources are laid down in terms of the Bell or Bell-type inequalities whose violation confirms the existence of quantum correlations in the system. The Bell-type inequalities for three-qubit pure entangled systems itself either fail to distinguish between bipartite and tripartite inequalities or fail to identify the presence of nonlocal correlations in a large set of states. The intricacy of the problem increases further considering the real conditions. Moreover, discord- a measure of genuine nonlocal correlations- is difficult to evaluate analytically due to the optimization procedures involved. A simple description that can be obtained analytically to distinguish the quantum and classical boundaries would therefore be of great value. Hence, the relationship between entanglement, correlations, and non-classicality needs adequate attention to analyse, evaluate and understand the importance and significance of quantum correlations in communication and computing. In this project, we aim to provide a general description of entangled systems which may provide a consistent definition of entanglement in bi-partite as well as multipartite pure states. The approach developed for pure states will also be extended to family of mixed states. Our study will be based on the distinction of quantum and classical correlations for understanding the relation between entanglement, nonlocality, and efficiencies of different quantum information processing protocols.

2. Chiral Calix Crowns for asymmetric phase transfer catalyst DST Women Scientist (WOS-A),

Department of Chemistry

Pragati R. Sharma, PI (2019-22)

Project Description:

Calix[n]arenes (n=4,6,8) have been widely studied due to their three-dimensional shape and ease of functionalization. The synthetic flexibility of calixarenes makes them a suitable candidate for a wide range of applications that include molecular recognition, sensors and variable architectures. The Phase transferability of Calix-crowns plays a very important role for various biological and pharmaceutical applications, most interest in the development of enantioselective reactions to obtain optically active molecules. In this proposal PI will develop novel series of chiral Calix-crown derivatives with systemic variation in chiral functionalities such as chiral amines and esters in the lower rim, exploiting four phenolic OH groups for catalytic applications. These novel chiral calix-crown PTC are sensitive towards cations, lead to asymmetric induction for industrially important alkylation of C=X (X=N, S, C) and Tsuji-Trost allylic alkylation.

Publications:

    S. Pandey, P. R. Sharma, V.K. Soni, G. Choudhary and R.K. Sharma, Cucurbit[6]uril and 4-tert-Butylcalix[6]arene as Multifunctional Lubricant Additives, New Journal of Chemistry, 2020,44,3425-3433
    P. R. Sharma, S. Pandey, V. K. Soni, G. Choudhary, R.K. Sharma, Macroscopic Recognition of Iodide by Polymer Appended Calix[4]amidocrown Resin, 2019, Supramolecular Chemistry, 31, 634-644 

3. Impact of Rainwater Harvesting on Groundwater Quality in India with Specific Reference to Fluoride and Mircropollutants

Department of Science & Technology (DST), Government of India

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI (2018-21)

Project Description:

Groundwater is the main source of freshwater in many parts of the world however excessive abstraction is causing a continuous decrease in water tables in some places. In Rajasthan on the Western side of India, methods are being utilized to replenish groundwater and provide a reliable water supply. This is achieved in several ways including the use of Rainwater Harvesting (RWH) systems. These structures capture rainwater and runoff and allow it to infiltrate into the subsurface and subsequently aquifers. In India this has been achieved both through traditional approaches such as storing water in percolation ponds and in check dams. The use of more novel emerging approaches such as sand dams has also been explored. A sand dam is a concrete wall built across a seasonal riverbed. During the rainy season, a seasonal river forms and carries sand downstream. The sand accumulates behind the dam and is filled with water providing storage, this water can then be abstracted or percolate into the groundwater. Although these techniques increase water availability it is unclear as to their effect on groundwater quality. Depending on the scale and location of RWH structures, rainwater contained within them may contain a range of harmful substances. These pollutants could travel through the RWH structures and contaminate the groundwater. Additionally, in Rajasthan, high fluoride concentrations in the groundwater are a major health concern. Excessive fluoride in drinking water causes dental and skeletal fluorosis. This problem may be worsened as dissolved organic matter (DOM) present in harvested rainwater which has been found to increase fluoride levels during recharge. The analysis of the transport of pollutants and DOM in RWH structures is thus of crucial importance in ensuring groundwater quality. This transport can be effected by a number of different factors most notably design and location of these structures.

The field work will be carried out to monitor the water quality used for recharge and groundwater in the vicinity of the three RWH structures over a period of two years. This will include topographical surveys, groundwater level monitoring, water sampling, tracer testing, weather recording and obtaining soil samples to provide information on the mineral characteristics of the aquifer material. In addition, laboratory testing will be completed on water samples obtained from the field. The quality of the rainwater and groundwater will be assessed using a variety of techniques. Parameters tested will include nutrients, e.coli, heavy metals and pharmaceuticals amongst others. To enhance our understanding of the impact of DOM present in rainwater on Fluoride levels in groundwater, fluorescence excitation-emission matrix (F-EEM) will be used. Pollutant transport models which simulate pollutant transport and DOM interaction with fluoride in RWH structures and across the whole catchment will be created.

Publications:

    Parker, A., Lise, N., Sharma, R.K., et al (2019) Managed aquifer recharge and its impact on fluoride contamination in Rajasthan, Hydrochemistry and Human Health processdngs, GH21A-04; 2019AGUFMGH21A..04P (American Geophysical Union)
    Singh,J., Vija, K.L., Sharma,R.K., et.al. (2019) Estimation of Soil Water Retention Characteristics of a Novel Artificial Recharge System located in Laporiya, Rajasthan, Groundwater, xx, xxx
    Nunes-Pereiraa,J., Lima,R., Choudhary,G., Sharma,P.R., Ferdov,S., Botelho,G., Sharma,R.K., and Lanceros-Mendez,S., (2018), “Highly efficient removal of fluoride from aqueous media through polymer composite membranes,” Separation and Purification Technology, (Elsevier), Vol. 205 pp 1-10
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., Gupta, R., and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Engineered ZnO-TiO2 Nanospheres for High Performing Membrane Assimilated Photocatalytic Water Remediation and Energy Harvesting,” ChemistrySelect (Wiley), Vol. 3, pp 7291-7301

4. Development of Catalytic Diastereo and Enantiodivergent Tandem Reactions

Department of Science & Technology (DST), Government of India

Nirmal Kumar Rana, PI (2018-20)

Project Description:

In Nature many organic compounds exist in stereoisomers and they often exhibit different chemical and biological properties. Organic molecules having cyclohexane core with multiple stereogenic centres are common structural subunits found in many natural products and pharmaceuticals. Several recent studies in asymmetric synthesis are reported for their synthesis. Nonetheless, despite the great progress made on asymmetric catalysis in the past decades, for compounds containing multiple stereogenic centers, it still remains a great challenge to freely access all the possible stereoisomers. This project is focused to establish new approaches for the synthesis of diversely substituted cyclohexane in a stereodivergent fashion.

Publications:

    K. Rana, K. Shukla, P. Mahto, R. K. Jha, V. K. Singh, A facile and highly diastereoselective synthesis of carbocyclic spiro-pyrazolones via DABCO catalyzed Michael-Michael domino reaction, Tetrahedron, 2018, 74, 5270-5279
    Shukla, S. Shah, N. K. Rana, V. K. Singh, An efficient and highly diastereoselective synthesis of carbocyclic spiropyrazolones via one-pot sequential dual organo-silver catalyzed Michael-hydroalkylation reactions, Tetrahedron Letters 2019, 60, 92-97
    Mahto, N. K. Rana, K. Shukla, B. G. Das, H. Joshi, V. K. Singh, Asymmetric Multifunctional Modular Organocatalysis: One-Pot Direct Strategy to Enantiopure α,β-Disubstituted γ-Butyrolactones, Org. Lett. 2019, 21, 5962-5966

5. Tandem Annulations Involving Metallocarbenes: Towards Diverse Molecular Architectures

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Sandip Murarka, PI (2018-21)

Project Description:

Transition-metal carbenes/carbenoids as active intermediates play an important role in modern organic synthesis. They undergo a wide variety of synthetic transformations, such as, cycloadditions, cyclopropanations, etc. among many others. These transformations have proven to be valuable tools in the construction of complex molecular scaffolds. The investigator proposes to develop novel reaction technologies to exploit the reactivity of carbenoids in a range of diverse cascade annulation processes to afford myriad of molecular architectures.

Publications:

    R. Budhwan, S. Yadav, S. Murarka*, Late Stage Functionalization of Heterocycles Using Hypervalent Iodine(III) Reagents, Org. Biomol. Chem. 2019, 17, 6326.
    S. Das, S. K. Parida, T. Mandal, L. Sing, S. De Sarkar*, S. Murarka*, Organophotoredox Catalyzed Cascade Radical Annulation of 2-(Allyloxy)arylaldehydes with N-(acyloxy)phthalimides: Towards Alkylated Chroman-4-one Derivatives, Chem. Asian J. 2020, 15, 568.
    R. Budhwan, G. Garg, I. N. N. Namboothiri*, S. Murarka*, Hypervalent Iodine(III) Reagents in the Synthesis of Heterocyclic Compounds, in Reviews and Accounts on Heterocyclic Chemistry, O. A. Attanasi, P. Merino, D. Spinelli (Eds.), Targets Heterocycl. Syst. 2019, 23, 27-52.

6. Ligand based 19F NMR Methods with Selective Pulses to Probe Small-Molecule Protien Interaction

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan

Samanwita Pal, PI (2017-20)

Project Description:

Analysis and quantification of ligand-protein interaction draws major attention in the field of biomedicine, agrochemicals to name a few. In the recent past solution state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) has emerged as one of the most powerful method for understanding the impact of various small to intermediate sized ligands on protein structure and function. The project aims to investigate ligand-protein interactions using solution-state multinuclear 1D Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy as a major technique complemented by fluorescence quenching studies, molecular docking, and Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC), whenever required. Figure 1 represents the graphical illustration of one of the objective. Three different problems are being addressed under this umbrella. Organophosphate-protein interaction using 1H NMR, Organoflurine-protein interaction employing 19F NMR and small molecule-Humic acid interaction analysis employing multinuclear NMR methods based on relaxation, diffusion and Saturation Transfer Difference.

Publications:

    Vandana, Chaubey, B., Dhaharwal, A. K., & Pal, S., Solvent-dependent binding interactions of the organophosphate pesticide, chlorpyrifos (CPF), and its metabolite, 3,5,6- trichloro-2-pyridinol (TCPy), with Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA): A comparative fluorescence quenching analysis. Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology, Elsevier, 2017,139, 92-100.
    Dahiya, V., & Pal, S. The effect of paracetamol on 5 fluorouracil and bovine serum albumin interaction: A biophysical study. AIP Conference Proceedings.2018,1953(1), 140012.
    Chaubey, B., & Pal, S. Binding Interaction of Organofluorine−Serum Albumin: A Comparative Ligand-Detected 19F NMR Analysis. Journal of Physical Chemistry B., 2018 122(40), , 9409−9418.
    Salian, S. R., Nayak, G., Kumari, S., Patel, S., Gowda, S., Shenoy, Y., Sugunan, S., GK, R., Managuli, R., Mutalik. S., Dahiya, V, Pal, S., Adiga, S. & K. Guruprasad. Supplementation of biotin to sperm preparation medium enhances fertilizing ability of spermatozoa and improves preimplantation embryo development. Journal of Assisted Reproduction and Genetics, Springer, 2018, ISSN: 1058-0468., https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-018-1323-1.
    Chaubey, B., & Pal, S. Hexaflumuron_β-Cyclodextrin Inclusion Complex as Improved Pesticide Formulation: A NMR Case Study. AIP Conference Proceedings,2019, 2142 (1), 180003.

7. Development of Electrochemical Energy Storage from Carbon Rich Waste

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Ritu Gupta, PI and Rakesh K. Sharma, Co-PI (2017-20)

Project Description:

The disposal of waste organic materials such as polymers is a serious problem to natural ecosystems as some of them can be non-biodegradable and potentially toxic.The recycling of waste material can largely help to address environmental problem however recycling is limited due to lack of infrastructure, facilities for recycling and complexity involved.Several methods have been developed for the recycling of polymers such as polyesters, polyethylene and polypropylene.During recycling, the well-defined hydrocarbons (CnH2n) that are generated could be used directly to produce carbon nanomaterials. Carbon is one of the stable form of material that is utilized extensively as electrode material for energy storage devices. Porous carbons suchas activated carbon, carbon nanotubes and graphene are used exclusively as the active electrode materials in electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs). The performance of EDLCs depend on surface area and electrical conductivityof the graphitic carbon which is produced.The high porosity of carbon based nanomaterials is conventionally coupled to poor electrical conductivity that increases with addition of conductive fillers and binders. This by far has prevented the commercialization of these materials as active electrodes in EDLCs. In this project, we propose to develop a cost effective process for synthesis of carbon based materials from waste polymeric sources for the fabrication of electrodes for supercapacitors.

Publications:

    Bahuguna, G; Choudhary, S; Sharma, R. K.; Gupta, R.* Electrophilic Fluorination of Graphitic Activated Carbon for Enhancement in Electric Double Layer Capacitance Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900667.
    Bahuguna, G. Ram, P.; Sharma, R. K. and Gupta, R.* An Organo-fluorine Compound Mixed Electrolyte for Ultrafast Electric Double Layer Supercapacitors ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2767.

8. Solid State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Assessment of Zinc Oxide (ZnO) Nanomaterial Based Drug Delivery Systems

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Samanwita Pal, PI (2017-20)

Project Description:

The project aims to apply various one and two dimensional solid state NMR experiments to characterize molecular interaction of bare and surface functionalized ZnO nanomaterials with some anticancer drugs and amino acids. Established literature methods are used to synthesize ZnO nanoparticle and nanorods along with drug loading and adsorption of amino acids. Multinuclear solid state NMR experiments are used to understand drug dynamics and mechanism of adsorption. In the project, a set of ZnO nanomaterials have been synthesized and characterized following established literature methods. Further, the materials are used for surface functionalization with small anti-cancer drug and amino acid. Solid state CPMAS NMR experiments are carried out to analyse the effect of surface adsorption on the small drug molecules. A series of solid state relaxation measurements are also undertaken to understand the modification in dynamic regime due to adsorption.

Publications:

    Kumar, D., & Pal, S.Optical Band Gap and Crystallite Size Investigations of Anticancer Drug Loaded ZnO.. AIP Conference Proceedings 2142 (1), 2019, 180004. 

9. New Single Source Precursors for Potential Nanostructured Bi2Te3/sb2Te3 System Based Thermoelectric Materials

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Ramesh K.Matre, PI (2017-20)

Project Description:

Group V/VI materials of the type V2VI3 such as antimony and bismuth telluride (Sb2Te3, Bi2Te3) are narrow band-gap layered semiconductors are attracting intense interest in the recent years due to their potential applications as superior thermoelectric materials at ambient temperature range. single source precursors approaches in presence of non-aqueous solution to synthesize nanostructures seems advantageous as it provide better control over particle size and morphology and thereby expected to improve overall properties.In this project, functionalized tellurium centered ligands will be synthesized using intramolecular coordination strategy while some of the ligands will be synthesized utilizing bulky organic substituent. These ligands will be reacted with appropriate starting metal precursor to synthesize various coordination complexes of p block elements such as Bi, Sb and Sn. It is expected that a library of coordination complexes will be formed and in all the case structure and nuclearity of the final product will be governed by the reaction conditions and type of the starting reactant used. In each case systematic characterization of all the complexes will be carried out. While NMR ESIMS, IR spectroscopy will be used to characterize the ligands, structural characterization of the complexes will be carried out by Single crystal X-ray diffraction. All the complexes will also be investigated by DSC and TGA/DTA (thermal properties) techniques. All the complexes will be converted into nanostructured materials via solution phase decomposition method. Nanostructured materials will be further characterized by SEM, TEM, EDX and PXRD techniques. In addition, their thermoelectric properties will be investigated in collaboration. It is anticipated that these nanostructured materials will show interesting thermoelectric properties.

Publications:

    A. Mishra, A. Betal, N. Pal, R. Kumar, P. Lama, S. Sahu, R. K. Metre Molecular Memory Switching Device Based on a Tetranuclear Organotin Sulfide Cage [(RSnIV)4(μ-S)6]·2CHCl3·4H2O (R = 2-(Phenylazo)phenyl): Synthesis, Structure, DFT Studies, and Memristive Behavior, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 2020, 2, 1, 220-229

10. Catalytic Upgrading of Bio-Oil (Algae-Oil) to Transport Fuel

Department of Biotechnology, Government of India

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI (2014-20)

Project Description:

The proposal aims to develop new and improved heterogeneous catalytic systems for conversion of algal/non-edible/pyrolysis oil to transport fuel and value-added products via hydrodeoxygenation (HDO), Hydrodecarbonyltaion, decarboxylation and hydrogenation processes. The heterogeneous catalytic systems based on d8 & d9 metals nanoparticles supported on clay and silica-alumina is developed.

Scale-up and recycling of catalyst and catalytic at kilogram has also been successfully carried out. The catalyst could be recycled up 50 cycles with>99 % hydrocarbon selectivity and < 1 ppm metal leaching. The project discovers best sulphide free non-noble metals catalyst that can work at ~250 oC and 5 bar pressure to develop diesel grade bio-fuel from biomass. Clay catalyzed hydrogenation of squalene to squalane (emollient used in cosmetics) with 99.999% purity (best ever) is also a major achievement.


Publications:

    Metal Nanoparticles Intercalated Clay for Solvent Free Hydrogenation of Squalene into Squalane : Indian Pat. Appl. (2018), IN 201611009866 A 20180126 
    Metal(s)/clay Catalysts for Converting Biomass into Diesel Grade Hydrocarbons: Indian Pat. Appl. (2019), IN 201711025555 A 20190125 
    Metal Nanoparticles Doped Hollow Carbon Nanobubbles and Preparation Method thereof 201911017622 Application Date 2-May-2019
    A Hydrogen-Annealed Bimetallic Oxide and Implementations Thereof 201911031662 Application Date 5-August-2019
    Laishram, D., Shejale, K.P., Krishnapriya, R., Sharma, R.K., (2020) Nitrogen-Enriched Carbon Nanobubbles and Nanospheres for Applications in Energy Harvesting, Storage, and CO2 Sequestration, ACS Applied Nano Materials, (American Chemical Society)Vol. 3, pp 3706-3716
    Krishanpriya,R., Gupta,U., Soni,V.K., and Sharma,R.K., (2020), “Catalytic Conversion of Biomass to Diesel Grade Hydrocarbon: Impact of Cobalt (II,III) oxide Integration in SiO2-Al2O3, Sustainable Energy & Fuels, (Royal Society of Chemistry), (Accepted; https://doi.org/10.1039/C9SE01221D)
    Soni,V.K., Krishanpriya,R., and Sharma,R.K., (2020), “Highly Selective Co3O4/Silica-Alumina Catalytic System for Deoxygenation of Triglyceride-based Feedstock, Fuel, Vol 266, pp 117065 (Elsevier)
    Sharma,P., Solanki M. and Sharma,R.K., (2019), “Metal Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes for Biomass Conversion: Base-Free highly Efficient and Recyclable Catalysts for Aerobic Oxidation of 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural”. New Journal of Chemistry, (Royal Society of Chemistry), Vol. 43, pp 10601-10609
    Soni,V.K., Roy,T., Dhara,S., Choudhary,G., Sharma,P.R., Sharma,R.K., (2018), On the investigation of acid and surfactant modification of natural clay for photocatalytic water remediation, Journal Material Science, (Springer), Vol. 53 pp 10095-10110.
    Devika,L., Shejale,K.P., Gupta,R., and and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Solution Processed Hafnia Nanoaggregates: Influence of Surface Oxygen on Catalytic Soot Oxidation,” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, (American Chemical Society) Vol. 6, pp 11286-11294
    Soni,V.K., Sharma,P.R., Choudhary,G., Pandey,S., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Ni/Co-Natural Clay as Green Catalysts for Microalgae Oil to Diesel-Grade Hydrocarbons Conversion, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, (American Chemical Society), Vol.5, pp 5351-5359
    Soni,V.K., and Sharma,R.K., (2016), “Palladium Nanoparticles Intercalated Montmorillonite Clay: A Green Catalyst for Solvent Free Chemoselective Hydrogenation of Squalene,” ChemCatChem, (Wiley), Vol. 8, pp 1763-1768 (COVER PAGE)

11. Streamlined Total Synthesis of Biologically Active natural Products: Unified Approach to the Potent Indole Diterpeniods

IIT Jodhpur, SEED Grant

Rohan D. Erande, PI (2019-22)

Project Description:

Natural products synthesis is a vibrant research area of the chemistry that plays the major role in human life whereas, natural products as a medicine is one of the important weapons to cure from various diseases. To date, thousands of natural products and their synthetic analogs are presents in the market to treat either independent or combined with the various types of targeted diseases. Though, many of diseases increasingly being hampered by the presence of multidrug-resistant parasites in fact some of the diseases are still alive (ex. Cancer). Despite considerable progress in medical research they remain one of the high-ranking causes of the death in the world today. So, new natural products with new mechanism of action that display the required chemical diversity to help combat drug resistance are always required, and to achieve such a targets, it is necessitate to develop new reactions and methods and their applications in the total synthesis of novel biologically active indeed architecturally complex natural products remain constantly demanding. So, we take this opportunity to develop a unified approach towards advances and applications in the total synthesis of numerous biologically active indole diterpenoids.

12. Pincer Ligand based Transition Metal Catalysts Design for Carbon dioxide activation and catalytic utilization

IIT Jodhpur, SEED Grant

Subrata Chakroborty, PI (2019-22)

Project Description:

The ongoing project is exploring the possibility of designing novel pincer transition metal catalysts in combination of Lewis acid moieties and their potential to exploit industrially important and catalytically challenging high-value chemical transformations under mild conditions utilizing potent greenhouse gas CO2 as a raw material.

13.Modelling Organic and Biochemical Phenomena via Direct Chemical Dynamics Simulations Core Research Grant,

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Manikandan P., PI (2020-23)

Project Description:

In this project, state-of-the-art direct dynamics methodology along with appropriate electronic structure theory will be used to investigate important and interesting chemical phenomena. Two different problems will be addressed: (a) mechanisms of covalent adduct formation between DNA base pairs with few select carcinogens, and (b) chemistry of negatively charged arenes. An atomic level dynamics investigation of covalent adduct formation between DNA bases and a few select carcinogenic molecules will be undertaken. The results from these simulations are expected to provide a detailed atomic level mechanistic information about DNA adduct formation useful in drug designing.

14. Thermodynamic Origin and Stability of Asymmetric Bilayers Core Research Grant,

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Ananya Debnath, PI (2020-23)

Project Description:

The naturally existing bilayers are mostly asymmetric in nature and act as a selective barrier for the passage of extracellular fluids or ions within the cell. The difference in compositions across two leaflets results in asymmetric inhomogeneous bilayers. These are vital for a number of metabolic phenomena such as thrombosis, phagocytois etc. We aim to understand the origin and stability of asymmetry in biological membranes using multi-scale modeling.

Some of the prominent on-going Sponsored Research Projects include:
1. A Game-theoretic perspective of Quantum Information Processing

PI: Atul Kumar

Project Description:

Game theory is an eminently interesting and flourishing field of study, wherein many situations of conflicts can be efficiently examined and resolved. With the advent of quantum information and computation, the quest to analyze classical game theory in quantum realm received significant interest not only to investigate the foundational aspects of quantum theory but also to inspect conditions where quantum strategies can be beneficial in comparison to classical strategies. The central idea to study and analyze quantum strategies as opposed to classical strategies is to achieve a better payoff or reward well within the settings of a game. The advantages using quantum strategies in a game theoretic framework are mainly attributed to quantum entanglement and nonlocal correlations present in the shared quantum resource. In fact, Bell and Bell-type inequalities- whose violation confirms the presence of nonlocal correlations in a quantum system- have a very strong connection with game theory. The basic framework of the Bell inequality based on locality and realism can be formulated in the game-theoretic realm using the CHSH (Clauser-Horne-Simony-Holt) game. Further the element of incompleteness, present in quantum mechanics and reflected in assumptions of Bell’s inequality, is nicely portrayed as games with partial information; also known as Bayesian games. Moreover, quantum game theory also finds its application in analyzing security, algorithms, quantum key distribution, and quantum communication protocols by representing these concepts as games between different players. Our group is interest in analyzing the role of entanglement and nonlocality in quantum information, computation, and security using different perspectives of quantum game theory.

2. Solution dynamics of amino acids and peptides: Application of NMR relaxation and Dynamic Nuclear Polarization Technique

PI: Samanwita Pal

Project Description:

In this project we aim to understand molecular association and/or higher order structure formation under the influence of co-solute interaction in solution. NMR relaxation at high and low field in conjunction with Dynamic Nuclear Polarization has been employed to address to problems of interest: Self association of amino acids in presence of salts and structural transition of peptides in presence of fluoroalcohols.

Publications:

    Bhagat, S., Hydrophobic Interaction of Alanine in Aqueous Electrolyte Solution: A NMR Spin-Lattice Relaxation Analysis, Master’s Thesis submitted to Dept. of Chemistry, IITJ, 2018
    Chaubey, B., Dey, A., Banerjee, A., Chandrakumar, N. & Pal, S. Assessment of TFE solvent dynamics inducing conformational transitions in Melittin: An approach with solvent 19F low field NMR relaxation and Overhauser DNP studies. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2019 (Under Review).

3. Solution state NMR investigation of drug delivery systems: Supramolecular and polymeric DDS

PI: Samanwita Pal

Project Description:

Solution state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy have been extensively used for the purpose of confirming encapsulation, structural details and stability of inclusion complexes of small drug molecules and supramolecular DDS. Similarly polymeric microspheres are also explored for drug encapsulation and consequently have been analysed by NMR in solution state providing knowledge about encapsulation efficiency, release kinetics and stability of encapsulated drugs. In this project, our main objective is to employ 1D selective NMR relaxation methods for analyzing motional dynamics of β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) encapsulated drug molecules. Further, NMR exchange experiments in one dimensional mode has been employed to understand effect of encapsulation on the proton dynamics of uracil molecule in case of polymeric microspheres.

Publications:

    Kumar, D., & Pal, S. Solution Dynamics of 5-Fluorouracil entrapped in Poly Lactic-co-Glycolic Acid (PLGA) microsphere - A study with 1D selective NMR methods. Magnetic Resonance in Chemistry. 57, 2019, 118-128.https://doi.org/10.1002/mrc.4799
    Kumar, D., Krishnan, Y., Paranjothy, M., & Pal, S., Analysis of Molecular Interaction of Drugs within b-Cyclodextrin Cavity by Solution-State NMR Relaxation. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, ACS, 121(13), 2017, 2864-2872.
    Kumar, D., Krishnan, Y., Paranjothy, M., & Pal, S., Structure and dynamics of cyclodextrin inclusion complexes: Applicability of 1D selective NMR methods. (Communicated to ChemPhysChem)

4. Coupling between water and membrane dynamics

PI: Ananya Debnath

Project Description:

Water is the most abundant molecule in cells. Water molecules near membranes affect several biological processes such as transport of drugs and small molecules across the cell, influences formation of membrane rafts, molecular recognition, signal transduction and so on. In the past decade, with a major advancement of computer simulations and experimental techniques, water near bio and soft interfaces are found to have distinct properties with slow relaxations compared to that of the bulk water and these water molecules are termed as biological water. However, dynamics of biological water from membrane experiments remain fragmentary due to the fluidity of membranes at physiological temperature and inaccessible atomistic trajectories. Moreover, the influence of water on global dynamics of membrane or protein are still debated. The hydration water dynamics near lipid membranes are investigated using all atom molecular dynamics simulations. Chemically confined interfacial water and lipid membranes exhibit distinct relaxation rates manifesting dynamical heterogeneity. We aim to find the correlation between relaxation time scales of interface water and hydrogen bonded lipid moieties so that hydration dynamics can act as a sensitive reflector of regional membrane dynamics.


Completed Projects

Faculty Members of the Department have completed the following Sponsored Research Projects:

    Towards The Development Of Low-Cost Water Quality Sensors (Phase-II) Panasonic Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2015
    Slow relaxations of chemically confined water near membranes Ananya Debnath, PI 

The slow relaxations are found to be universal irrespective of the nature of chemical confinement as the underlying source is dynamical heterogeneities at physiological temperature.


Publications:

    Srivastava, A., & Debnath, A. (2018). Hydration dynamics of a lipid membrane: Hydrogen bond networks and lipid-lipid associations. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 148(9), 094901. ISSN: 0021-9606. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5011803
    Srivastava, A., Malik, S., & Debnath, A. (2019). Heterogeneity in structure and dynamics of water near bilayers using TIP3P and TIP4P /2005 water models. Chemical Physics, 525, 110396. ISSN: 0301-0104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemphys.2019.110396
    Srivastava, A., Karmakar, S., & Debnath, A. (2019). Quantification of spatio-temporal scales of dynamical heterogeneity of water near lipid membranes above supercooling. Soft Matter, 15(47), 9805-9815. ISSN: 1744-6848. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9SM01725A


3. Phase transition of surfactants

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Ananya Debnath,PI 2014-16

Surfactants are amphilic molecules which can self-assemble into different macro-aggregates with huge applications in cosmetic industry, oil recovery process, etc. Designing a phase for the self-assembled surfactants is important to target a functionality relevant for industry. We find that water concentration can be a controlling parameter for a micelle to lamellar phase transition using all-atom molecular dynamics (AA-MD) simulations. Using multi-scale modeling we find that trans-bilayer compositional asymmetry can induce a interdigitated gel to ripple phase transition at the same temperature and surfactant to cosurfactant ratio. These phases are particularly important for formulating hair conditioners, hair gels, etc.

Publications:

    Lunkad, R., Srivastava, A., & Debnath, A. (2017). Influence of water concentrations on the phase transformation of a model surfactant /co-surfactant/water system. Chemical Physics, 483–484, 103–111. ISSN: 0301-0104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemphys.2016.11.014
    Srivastava, A., & Debnath, A. (2019). Cylindrical to Spherical Shape transformations of Micelles using All-Atom and Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics Simulations, AIP Conference Proceedings, 2142, 130004. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5122512.

4. Role of non-covalent forces in peptide-based soft-materials

Ananya Debnath, PI

Non-covalent forces are responsible for the association of peptidebased hydrogels which are biologically inspired and have applications in material sciences/technology. We focus on understanding the driving forces behind the self-assembled super structures. Integrated information from e lectronic structure calculations and MD simulations provide insights on the preferential building blocks of self-assembled structures and the underlying physical phenomena driving water confinement within hydrogels with bio-medical applications (Sci Rep 2017, Chem Sci 2019, Bul. Mat. Sci. 2020).

Publications:

    Ahmed, S., Pramanik, B., Sankar, K. N. A., Srivastava, A., Singha, N., Dowari, P., Srivastava, A., Mohanta, K., Debnath, A. & Das, D. (2017). Solvent assisted tuning of morphology of a peptide-perylenediimide conjugate: helical fibers to nano-rings and their differential semiconductivity. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 9485. ISSN: 2045-2322. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-09730-z
    Singha, N., Srivastava, A., Pramanik, B., Ahmed, S., Dowari, P., Chowdhuri, S., Das, B. K., Debnath, A. & Das, D. (2019). Unusual confinement properties of a water insoluble small peptide hydrogel. Chemical Science, 10(23), 5920–5928. ISSN: 2041-6539. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9SC01754B
    Srivastava, A., Garg, A., Das, D. & Debnath, A. (2020). Molecular dynamics simulations of a stacked π–conjugated soft material: binding energy and preferential geometry for self-assembly, Invited article on Bulletin of Materials Science for the Thematic issue on Soft Materials, in press.

5. Chemical Dynamics Simulations of Complex Organic Reactions: Mechanistic Insights and Microsolvation Effects

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Manikandan Paranjothy, PI 2014-17

Publications:

    Y. Krishnan, N. Sharma, U. Lourderaj, and M Paranjothy, Classical Dynamics Simulations of Dissociation of Protonated Tryptophan in the Gas Phase, J. Phys. Chem. A 121, 4389, 2017.
    Y. Krishnan, A. Vincent, and M. Paranjothy, Classical Dynamics Simulations of Interstellar Glycine Formation via CH2=NH + CO + H2O Reaction, J. Chem. Sci. 129, 1571, 2017.
    S. Godara, P. Verma, and M. Paranjothy, Dissociation chemistry of 3-Oxetanone in the gas phase, J. Phys. Chem. A 121, 6679, 2017.

6. Solid State High Energy Density Lithium Ion Rechargeable Batteries

Indo-Portuguese Research Cooperation in Science & Technology

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2014-17

The project is towards the development of fast charging and high energy density Li-ion rechargeable batteries, where IIT Jodhpur and the University of Minho, Portugal together developed efficient cathode materials, polymer separators stable at higher voltages (> 5 volts). The cathode materials are prepared via surface modification and doping lanthanides in LMO, and the separator is produced as porous membranes based on polar polymers. Based on performance, coil cells are fabricated and characterization for various field applications.


Publications:

    Ram,P., Patel, H., Singhal,R., Choudhary,G. and Sharma,R.K., (2019), “On the study of mixing and drying on electrochemical performance of spinel LiMn2O4 cathodes, Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy,( The American Institute of Physics),Vol. 11(1), pp 014104/1-014104/7
    Ram,P., Singhal,R., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Preliminary study of dysprosium doped LiMn2O4 spinel cathode materials, Materials Today Proceedings,(Elsevier),Vol. 4, pp 9365-9370
    Ram,P., Singhal,R., Choudhary,G., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “On the key role of Dy3 + in spinel LiMn2O4 cathodes for Li-ion rechargeable batteries, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, ( Elsevier), Vol. 802, pp 91-99
    Ram,P., Goren,A., Ferdov,S., Silva,M.M., Singhal,R., Costa,C.M., Sharma,R.K., and Lanceros-Mendez, S., (2017), “Synthesis and improved electrochemical performance of LiMn2xGdxO4 based cathodes, Solid State Ionics, (Elsevier), Vol. 300, pp 18-25
    Pura,R., Ferdov,S., Silva,M.M., Singhal,R., Costa,C.M., Sharma,R.K. and Lanceros-Mendez,S., (2016), “Improved performance of rare earth doped LiMn2O4 cathodes for lithium-ion battery applications,” New Journal of Chemistry, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 40, pp 6244-6252
    Ram,P., Sharma,R.K., and Singhal,R., (2014), “Synthesis, Physical and Impedance Spectroscopy of Tb(III) Doped LiMn2O4 Cathode Material for Lithium Ion Rechargeable Batteries,” Journal of Advanced Electrochemistry, (American Scientific Publishers) Vol.2, pp 46-49

7. Towards The Development Of Low-Cost Water Quality Sensors (Phase-I) Panasonic

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2014

8. Generation, Storage and Distribution of Solar Hydrogen

Department of Science & Technology (DST), Government of India

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2012-14

In this project, we have developed surfactant-free facile synthesis method for titania (TiO2) nanostructures, by which morphology and phase can be tuned through temperature variation. The formation of oval-shaped nanocrystals and nanorods at different temperatures are attributed to the phase transformation between anatase and rutile by a one-step chemical reaction process involving titanium tetraisopropoxide and aqueous ethyl alcohol. Categorically, two different morphologies of TiO2 were observed with respect to variation in temperature with nanorods formation at -20 °C and -10 °C and oval shape formation at -40 oC, -30 oC and 0 oC. Crystalline nature and size of TiO2 nanoparticles were determined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The energy gap of TiO2 nanoparticles was determined by optical absorption measurement and found to be in the range of ~ 2.92 to 3.02 eV with an indirect band nature. Additionally, we have developed highly efficient visible light M/MO/ABX3/CdS nano-composites for photocatalytic hydrogen production via water splitting (M= d and f-block elements; 259 examples) under sunlight.

Publications:

    Kiran P Shejale, Devika Laishram, Rakesh K Sharma and Arun Kumar Photocatalytic Nanocomposite and Applications Thereof: 201911008783 Application Date 6-March-2020
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Engineered ZnO-TiO2 Nanospheres for High Performing Membrane Assimilated Photocatalytic Water Remediation and Energy Harvesting,” ChemistrySelect (Wiley), 3, pp 7291-7301
    Devika,L., Shejale,K.P., Gupta,R., and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Heterostructured HfO2/TiO2 Nano-Spheroids for Visible Photocatalytic Water Remediation,” Material Letters, (Elsevier) 231, pp 225-228
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., Gupta,R., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Zinc Oxide-Titania Heterojunction-based Solid Nanospheres as Photoanodes for Electron-Trapping in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Energy Technology, (Wiley), Vol. 5, pp 489-494
    Laishram,D.,Shejale,K.P., Sharma,R.K., and Gupta,R., (2016), “HfO2 Nanodots Incorporated in TiO2 and its hydrogenation for High Performance Dye Sensitized Solar Cells, RSC Advances, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 6, pp 78768-78773
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., and Sharma,R.K., (2016), “High-performance dye-sensitized solar cell using dimensionally controlled titania synthesized at sub-zero temperatures,” RSC Advances, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 6, pp 23459-23466
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., Roy,M.S., Kumar,M., and Sharma,R.K., (2016), “On the study of phase and dimensionally controlled titania nanostructures synthesis at sub-zero temperatures, Materials & Design, (Elsevier), Vol. 92, pp 535-540

9. Asymmetric Hydrogenation on Carbon Nanotube Surface DST- RFBR, Indo - Russian Bilateral Project

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2012-14

In this project, we have developed highly selective novel heterogeneous nanocatalytic systems based on carbon materials and polymers. Out of various carbon-supported metals, the cinchona/Pt/MWCNTs is found to be most efficient system and provides high enantioselectivity (ee > 99.9 %) due to the high absorption of cinchona and atomically dispersed Pt nanoparticles that maximize metal utilization. Substrate-modifier interaction is examined by time dependent NMR studies. During this study, the excellent activity of Pt (111) plane is observed due to higher packing density, stability and cohesive energy than other crystal planes, leading to significant chemisorption of a variety of chemical entities. For that, a strategy is developed that involves the preparation of Pt (111) from phase transfer reagent Tw20, followed by mixing of functionalized carbon materials to obtain heterogeneous Pt (111) hexagonal nanocrystal loaded carbon catalyst, by simple thermolytic reduction in air, which are tested for asymmetric hydrogenation of α-ketoester at ambient reaction conditions, using cinchonine as a modifier. Chiral polymers are prepared and used as tunable supports, it is found that the chirality could be transferred from the support to substrate with ease in case of hydrogenation of carbonyl groups.

Publications:

    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2019), “Electrophilic [N-F]+ Catalysed Asymmetric Allylation of (E)-N, 1-diphenylmethanimine”, Chirality, (Wiley),Vol. 31, pp 91-96
    Nunes-Pereiraa,J., Sharma,P., Fernandes,L.C., Oliveira,J., Moreira,J.A., Sharma,R.K., and Lanceros-Mendez,S., (2018), “Poly(vinylidene fluoride) composites with carbon nanotubes decorated with metal nanoparticles,” Composites, Part B: Engineering, (Elsevier), 142, pp 1-8.
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Platinum/Graphene as Recyclable Catalyst for Asymmetric Hydrogenation of alpha-ketoesters,” Catalysis in Green Chemistry and Engineering, (Begell House), Vol. 1, pp 43-50, DOI: 10.1615/.2017020858
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Platinum functionalized Chiral Polyamides: Efficient Heterogeneous Catalyst for Solvent Free Asymmetric Hydrogenation of Ethyl 2-oxo-4-phenylbutanoate, ChemistrySelect, (Wiley), Vol. 2, pp 513-520
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2016), “Asymmetric Hydrogenation of ketoesters on Pt(111) Surface, New Journal of Chemistry, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 40, pp 9038-9041
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2015), “Platinum functionalized multiwall carbon nanotube composites as recyclable catalyst for highly efficient asymmetric hydrogenation of methyl pyruvate,” RSC Advances, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 5, pp 102481-102487
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2015), “Comparative study of Pt loaded carbon support catalysis in hydrogenation reaction,” Chemical Engineering and Chemical Processes, (Global Science and Technology Forum), Vol.5, pp 99-103

10. Molecular Sensors: Synthesis and Anion Recognition Studies

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2012-15

In this project new calix and cucurbit based supramolecular colourimetric sensors for selective recognition of toxic aquatic anions. Approximately 30 odd sensors were developed and they are selective towards ~20 anions including inorganic, organic drugs and vitamins. The arsenic, fluoride and ascorbate are few that give sharp colour changes.

Publications:

    Nunes-Pereiraa,J., Lima,R., Choudhary,G., Sharma,P.R., Ferdov,S., Botelho,G., Sharma,R.K., and Lanceros-Mendez,S., (2018), “Highly efficient removal of fluoride from aqueous media through polymer composite membranes,” Separation and Purification Technology, (Elsevier), Vol. 205 pp 1-10
    Sharma,P.R.; Soni,V.K., Pandey,S., Choudhary,G., Plappally,A.K., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Dipicrylhydrazine: A versatile visual anions sensor, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, (Elsevier), Vol. 5, pp 2232-2239
    Pandey,S., Soni,V.K., Choudhary,G., Sharma,P.R., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Understanding Behavior of Vitamin-C Guest Binding with the Cucurbit[6]uril Host, Supramolecular Chemistry, (Taylor and Francis), Vol. 29, pp 387-394
    Sharma,P., Choudhary,G., Satankar,R., Plappally,A.K., Sharma,R.K., (2015), “Development of Low Cost Polycalixarene-Clay Based Water Guards,” IWW, (Ministry of Water Resources, GoI), Vol.3, pp 91-99
    Choudhary,G., Sharma,R.K., and Plappally,A.K., (2015), ”Local Material composite sintered systems for fluoride removal,” Desalination and Water Treatment, (Taylor and Francis), Vol.10, pp 2626-2637


Collaborations

Faculty Members of the Department of Chemistry are keen to collaborate with individuals from academia, R&D laboratories and industry in India and abroad, in areas of mutual interest. These collaborations include:

    Teaching Activities (authoring books and review articles)
    Organising National and International Visits for undertaking Short Courses and Research Work
    Joint-MOUs for Degree Programs, Research facilities etc.
    Undertaking Research Projects and other research activities
    Developing technologies through Consultancy Projects with Industries 

The Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur is in collaboration with industrial partners as well as top universities in India and internationally.

Besides the academic program and research work, we also carry out instrumental measurements, chemical analysis, research training and consultancy work for industrial, academic, other research organizations as well as with individuals expressing such an interest. Our technical staff team is well-trained, experienced, skilled and capable of dealing with diverse analytical and chemical characterization tools. We, therefore, invite all who are interested in our work and potential cooperation to contact us for further information and details.


News and Newsletter

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Samapika Sahu, a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Ananya Debnath, has been awarded Third Prize in the Chemical Sciences category at the SARANSH Thesis Competition
2 	Congratulations to Dr Sandip Murarka for receiving the CRSI Bronze Medal
3 	Congratulations to Dr Sandip Murarka on his appointment as an Associate Editor of RSC Advances, a prestigious journal published by the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC).
4 	Congratulations to Dr. Sandip Murarka for receiving the prestigious 'Humboldt Research Fellowship for Experienced Researchers'
5 	Dr. Sudhir Kumar Hota Receives the NOST–Anthem Biosciences Best Thesis Award 2025
6 	Congratulations to Dr. Sandip Murarka for CRSI Bronze Medal
7 	List of Provisionally Selected & Waitlisted Candidates for PhD Admission (AY 2025-26 Semester I)
8 	List of Candidates Provisionally Shortlisted for Ph.D Interview (AY 2025-26 Semester I)
9 	Reporting Details for Ph.D Interview (AY 2025-26 Semester I)
10 	PhD Admission Open July 2025
11 	Dr. Sandip Murarka has been invited to join the Early Career Advisory Board of Chemistry-An Asian Journal from 2024.
12 	Congratulations to Dr. Sandip Murarka for receiving the prestigious 'Merck Young Scientist Award (Runner-Up)-2023' (MYSA-2023)
13 	Navigating PhD and Beyond, IIT Jodhpur- A dynamic event organized by IIT Jodhpur in collaboration with ACS.
14 	Samapika has won the BPS Travel Award 2025 to attend the Biophysical Society Meeting
15 	Sunita, a PhD research scholar working under the supervision of Dr. Ramesh K. Metre, is awarded "Best Poster Prize" in the conference, 


Welcome To The Department of Chemical Engineering
Translation of molecular information into discovery of new products and processes with Industry 4.0+ 
Vision & Mission of the Department

To become a globally recognized department of chemical engineering through its contribution in emerging and demand-driven areas with multidisciplinary approach.   

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers under-graduate (B.Tech.) and post-graduate (M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D.) programs in chemical engineering. Through the academic programs, the department is making a conscious effort to establish itself as a leading institute in the new genre of chemical engineering education. The program involves traditional courses, emerging areas and specialisations such as process engineering intelligence, molecular engineering and sustainability.

In line with the new education policy, B.Tech. (Chemical Engineering) students will have unique opportunity and flexibility for:

    Minor in (a)Management (b)Entrepreneurship (c)Data Science
    Five year B.Tech.+M.Tech./ MBA
    One year Engineering Innovation opportunity


Traditionally, chemical engineering teaching focuses on subjects like material and energy balance, transport phenomena, thermodynamics, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, chemical reaction engineering, numerical analysis, computational systems, biotechnology, petroleum-petrochemicals, polymers and safety engineering. With the advent of the era of Industry 4.0 in chemical companies, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), data analytics, internet of things (IoT), molecular engineering, nano-composites; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies and demand-driven areas.

The department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. At present, Chemical Engineering Department is sharing its expertise with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti; Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) etc. Department has signed MoU with the industries for providing consultancy services. Department is also actively involved in Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR) through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) and other societal initiatives.

Department has research interest in core and emerging areas; and is looking for faculty members in different areas of chemical engineering. Prospective candidates are encouraged to visit our recruitment page and apply.


Latest News

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Provisionally Selected Candidates for the PhD Program (January 2026 Session)
2 	Selected Candidates for the Interview and Written Exam for Admission to the PhD Program (January 2026 Session)
3 	Workshop: Open source molecular visualization techniques for researchers
4 	An e-Short Term Course on Applied Numerical Analysis with MATLAB: Theory & Hands-on Practice (Online mode)
5 	Admission to Ph.D. Program for Autumn, 2025-26
6 	Admission to M.Tech. Program 2025-26
7 	PhD Admissions Result AY 24-25 Sem - II
8 	List of candidates shortlisted for interview for admission to PH.D. Program, 2024-25, Sem-II
9 	PhD admission to Department of Chemical Engineering for session- Spring, AY 2024-25
10 	The Joint Admission Test for Masters ( JAM ) 2025
11 	Spot PG Admission for M.Tech/Ph.D./M.Tech-PhD. program 


Undergraduate Program

Bachelor of Technology Programs:

    B. Tech. in Chemical Engineering
    Double B.Tech. in Chemical Engineering and Engineering Science

Engineering disciplines have become increasingly interdisciplinary in nature and Chemical Engineering is not an exception to that. The flexibility of opting for different specialization is ingrained in formulating the structure and curriculum of the Chemical Engineering program. Traditionally, Chemical Engineering teaching is focused on transport phenomena, chemical engineering thermodynamics, mass transfer, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, chemical kinetics, computational systems, and process control. With the advent of the era of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), Molecular Engineering, Industry 4.0 in Chemical Plants; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies. Through this Under-Graduate (UG) program in Chemical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur is making a conscious effort to divulge from the traditional path and planning to establish itself to become a leading institute in this new genre of Chemical Engineering education, which includes foundational courses, fundamental courses in chemical engineering, emerging areas in chemical engineering, and sustainability aspects for chemical engineers.

The undergraduate program begins with students pursuing a common foundation in mathematics, physics, chemistry, engineering sciences, engineering design, and programming.

Students are expected to build on these foundations with a concentration on core chemical engineering subjects ranging from material and energy balance, process control, chemical engineering thermodynamics to chemical reaction engineering. Core courses are followed by a set of departmental electives that enable students to target their degree program towards in-depth knowledge of areas matching their specific interests.

The program ensures that the design experience, which includes both analytical studies and experiments, is integrated throughout the curriculum in a structured manner leading to advanced work.

Students can tailor their focus areas in consultation with a faculty advisor. Students can choose their departmental electives (streams) from the following areas:

    Chemical Engineering Design
    Process Engineering Intelligence
    Molecular Engineering
    Sustainability
    Complex Fluids & Interfacial Engineering
    Biochemical Engineering

Program Objective & Attributes

The key objectives of the program are:

    Enable students to have fundamental understanding of the core concepts of Chemical Engineering
    Offer opportunities for specialization in emerging and multidisciplinary areas including Molecular Engineering, Data Science and AI applications, Polymer Engineering, Sustainability, Biochemical Engineering and Complex Fluids & Interfacial Engineering
    Empower students with emerging concepts for plant design in context of chemical engineering via courses designed with AI, ML, and Industry 4.0 applications
    Integrate analytical and computational ability with experimental skills to create individuals competent in professional engineering practices in the domain of Chemical
    Inculcate an attitude towards commitment to engineering ethics, leadership qualities, entrepreneurship and professional development.


Learning Outcomes

Graduates of the B.Tech. program in Chemical Engineering will:

    Gain a strong understanding of mathematics, science and engineering fundamentals of Chemical engineering including the concepts of material and energy balance; computational methods; transport phenomena; reaction engineering; mass transfer; thermodynamics; heat transfer; fluid mechanics and process control
    Have the ability to design a process equipment or plant to meet desired requirements under socio-economic and environmental constraints.
    Be equipped with knowledge of emerging domains: (i) Data Science & AI applications; (ii) Molecular Engineering.
    Have technical capability for addressing sustainability issues related to water, energy and environment.
    Receive effective hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects, and be able to design and conduct experiments as well as to analyse and interpret data.
    Develop their communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, entrepreneurial events, seminars and workshops.

Postgraduate Program 

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers the following postgraduate programs:

    Master of Technology Program:  M.Tech. in Chemical Engineering
    Master of Technology-Doctor of Philosophy Dual Degree Program: M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical Engineering

Through the M.Tech. and M.Tech-Ph.D. programs in Chemical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur is making a conscious effort to divulge from the traditional path and planning to establish itself to become a leading institute in this new genre of Chemical Engineering education. The program involves a mix of traditional courses followed by electives to specialize in the three chosen areas;

i) Industry 4.0+Data Analytics;

ii) Reaction Engineering;

iii) Petroleum and Petrochemicals.

Further, the project component ensures hands-on problem-solving skills to enable solving industrial problems as well as undertake research in the different areas of chosen field.


Program Objective & Attributes

 The graduates of this program will have:

    In-depth knowledge of chemical engineering and critical awareness of emerging areas such as artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), internet of things (IoT) and data analytics in Chemical Engineering including intelligent process optimization and production simulation.
    Analytical and experimental skills required for new processes and new products with 3D printing, chemometrics and Industry 4.0 in chemical companies.
    Strong fundamentals in traditional chemical engineering.
    Ability to do critical and creative thinking, and to conduct independent and original research and scholarship
    Ability to apply existing skills and knowledge to identify and formulate new problems, produce new ideas, approaches or actions
    Ability to teach and express ideas in both written and oral formats


Learning Outcomes

At the end of the program, a student is expected to have:

    Skills for translation of in-depth knowledge of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), internet of things (IoT), Internet of Cleanliness and data analytics for chemical engineering systems.
    Ability to design and develop new products and new processes with the knowledge of 3D printing, chemometrics and Industry 4.0 in chemical companies including intelligent process optimization and production simulation.
    Ability to statistically characterize and evaluate the performance of process systems.
    Ability to apply the different methods for chemical engineering challenges and advanced research.
    Carry out research work demonstrating scientific problem solving and generate IPR.


Doctoral Program
Doctor of Philosophy Programs: Engineering Sciences

Ph.D. Chemical Engineering

Doctor of Philosophy in Chemical Engineering is focussed in a manner so that research scholar masters the different skills required for the research work, creatively shape and solve the complex problems, translate molecular information into new products and processes, generate new research ideas and IPR. The focus of the doctoral research  would be:

    Translate molecular information to new products and processes with 3D printing and Industry 4.0+
    Generate new research ideas and IPR


Curriculum

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers five degree programs as part of the undergraduate and postgradute curriculum, namely:

    B.Tech Chemical Engineering
    Double B.Tech Chemical Engineering and Engineering science
    M.Tech. Chemical Engineering
    Dual Degree M.Tech-Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering
    Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering

Academic Regulations
1. INTRODUCTION
Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the
highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge
creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, social
sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able
to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as energy,
food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific knowledge, IIT
Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and
team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on
campus.
The academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning,
creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing
deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability
to address and solve new problems with free and objective mind.
The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit System
and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted
Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired by Dean
(Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics- PG)/Associate
Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).
The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure high standard
of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within this
broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can include
additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These academic
programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate modifications/
improvements as and when necessary.
2. ACADEMIC SESSION
The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the
next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer
term as per the following timelines:
Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November
Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April
Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.
Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at
least 70.
2.1 Academic Calendar
The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic
Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of
courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,
declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the
Senate.
3. REGISTRATION
a. Registration: Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on
the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of
registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late
registration.
b. Provisional Registration: A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final results
of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate
from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the
qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying
examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be
regularized.
c. Late Registration: If the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned
in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against deregistration may be
made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. The Chairman Senate may permit the
continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.
d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of the
Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.
e. Withdrawing from a Course: After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the option of
withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically within four weeks
from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. The withdrawn course
will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.
f. Cancellation of Semester Registration: Absence for a period of four or more weeks during a
semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all the
courses in that semester.
g. Summer course registration: A department may offer summer courses to enable the students
to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during summer
provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered on
approval of the Dean/ Associate Dean.
4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION
4.1 Teaching
4.1.1 Medium of Instruction
The medium of instruction is English.
4.1.2 Course Structure
All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course is based on the number of contact hours
for lectures, tutorials, and practicals. A student on successful completion of the course with a
passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic
maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can consist
of independent components which can be completed independently. These components are
called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all parameters
related to the course numbering scheme.

4.1.3 Approval of Courses
The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved
courses may be offered during any semester/summer term.
4.1.4 List of Courses
The list of courses to be offered in a Program is finalized before the beginning of the semester, by
the Department hosting that Program.
4.1.5 Categories of Courses
Courses offered can be from one of the following categories:
a) Regular course:
A regular course has 14 hours of classroom engagement per credit. A regular course can be under
elective or core/compulsory categories.
Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students
register for the course. A 700 or 800 level elective course can run with a minimum of 5 registered
students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study course as per
the following section.
b) Self-study Course
A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by the Senate. The main features of a
self-study course are as follows:
● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course
provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student
is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.
● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in
self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered
as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course
with prior approval of the competent authority.
● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a
Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program committee. The final
sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).
● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.
● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the
award of letter grade at the end of the semester.
● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.
● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.
c) Independent Study Course
Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest
under the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involving
an instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-discipline and having a sense of
own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. A
student having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for Independent Study courses with the
recommendation of the Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study
course are as follows:
● A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study
course not exceeding 3 credits in self-study mode at most once during the program. Such
an independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the
program and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript.
● Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate
recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program
committee. The final sanction of an independent-study course to a student is made by the
Dean (Academics).
● Normally, no formal lectures will be held for an independent study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.
● The course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. The
Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award
of letter grade at the end of the semester.
4.1.6 Conduct of Courses
Each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors,
as needed. The instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance
of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per
Subsection 5.2.
The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations
conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the instructor(s) concerned.
The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.
A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct
contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In
direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face-to-face physical interaction with
the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students
to be concurrently connected to the class-room interaction via electronic conferencing involving
both audio and video communication. However, there has to be direct interaction between
faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided
study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up study of an
approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be also
adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the senate,
under supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation components applicable to courses being run
through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical
supervision of a faculty. All laboratory components of a course requiring use of a specialized
facility will be conducted through direct contact.
4.1.7 Teaching Assignments
The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the
Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are
also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in
consultation with the Head of that Department.
4.1.8 Auditing of Courses
A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the
permission of Dean (Academics) on the recommendations of the Instructor of the course being
audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade
Card of the student.
4.1.9 Attendance Requirements
A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless the student takes leave of absence
for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. The attendance
records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the student’s
attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. Students not
meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade to pass a
course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower than the cut-off for C
grade in a course.
4.2 Evaluation
The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the
classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers and
projects.
The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous
basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each
subject in each semester.
● Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of
a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes
duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits)
must have at least one examination.
● The total weightage of the examination component (three examinations for a 14-week
long course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.
● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.
● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom,
quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.
5. GRADING SYSTEM
5.1 Letter Grades
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the
Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten
regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each course.
Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in Table 5.1.
In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand for Incomplete,
Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty member shall
upload grades on the portal as per stipulated time schedule.

6. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT
A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at the
end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses,
credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades)
earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.
7. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES
The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those
related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by
the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All
such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.
8. MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS
A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness
etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The student
should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor within ten
days from the date of the missed examination, explaining the reasons for their absence.
Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take a
make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a
hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the
following categories:
● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certiﬁ
cate issued by the
Medical Oﬃ
cer of the Institute that he/she was admitted in the Hospital during the period
of the missed quiz/exam.
● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain written permission from the Medical Oﬃ
cer of the Institute Hospital
before they proceed for such consultation.
● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain an endorsement on the certiﬁ
cate of treatment by the Medical Oﬃ
cer
of the Institute Hospital.
● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a medical
certiﬁ
cate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly
endorsed by the parent/guardian.
A slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup /
supplementary week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those
who are permitted to take the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up
examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. However, in
exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up
examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in consultation with the Dean of Academics
may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the
ﬁ
rst week of the next semester. Under no circumstances prorating can be done for the
missed examinations or attendance.
REGULATIONS FOR PG PROGRAMME
9. POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently oﬀ
ers the following Postgraduate
programmes.
1. Master of Science (M.Sc.)
2. Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech.
3. Master of Technology (M.Tech.)
4. Dual degree: M.Tech.-PhD.
5. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)
10. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS
The process of admission for all the programs oﬀ
ered by the Institute normally is underway
during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition, the
department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis and
admit students as per the existing procedure.
10.1Categories of Admission
A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories
i. Full-time regular
ii. Full-time sponsored
iii. Part-time
iv. External
v. Part-time (online)
vi. Part-time (Project sponsored)
vii. Executive
However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be
oﬀ
ered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time programs).
i) Full-time Regular
An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student
supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.
ii) Full-time Sponsored
An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The
candidate is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must
have two years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.
iii) Part-time
A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attends regular classes as per
schedule of the Institute. The student must produce an NOC from the employer for pursuing the
programme at IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as
compared to a full-time regular student.
iv) External
A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped with
the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay in the
campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.
v) Part-time (online)
A part-time (online) student is a working professional who, while employed, attends classes in a
synchronous audio-visual mode as per the schedule of the Institute including limited contact
sessions. The student is expected to register for a limited number of credits per semester. The
student will need to spend at least 12 months in the campus before submission of the Ph.D thesis
distributed over the entire period of the programme as per the academic requirements. The
student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at IIT Jodhpur
certifying that the employer will also provide access to resources for proper execution of the
research work.
vi) Part-time (Project sponsored)
A part-time candidate is a project student receiving fellowship at least at the MoE stipulated rate
being supported through research projects running in the institute. The student can register only for
a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student. The student is expected to
receive the fellowship for a minimum of 36 months. The student will be paying fees at the same rate
as that of full time GATE Qualified candidates. The Department will process the applications ONLY if
such a position is available in the respective M. Tech. program.
vii) Executive (only for M. Tech.)
A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in
1. An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR
2. Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in maximum of 6 years.
3. Part-time or full-time mode by attending courses oﬀ
ered in synchronized remote contact
mode and limited direct interaction
10.2 Eligibility for Admission
a. The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may
prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.
a. The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the
Senate from time to time.
b. Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of
Governors.
10.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)
The admission to the M.Sc. Programs oﬀ
ered by the Institute will be through any one of the
following two avenues.
a) The applicants qualiﬁ
ed through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by
IITs.
b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3 or 4 year program)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for
SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0
for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a 
ﬁ
rst class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
10.2.2 Admission to M.Sc – M.Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)
The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs oﬀ
ered by the Institute will be
through any one of the following two avenues.
a) The applicants qualiﬁ
ed through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by
IITs.
b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3 or 4 year program)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for
SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0
for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a 
ﬁ
rst class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
10.2.3 Admission to M.Tech Program (Regular)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and
Veterinary Sciences or in related 
ﬁ
eld
b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a 
ﬁ
rst
class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualiﬁ
ed an equivalent National Examination or have qualiﬁ
ed in the written
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in related 
ﬁ
elds.
b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a 
ﬁ
rst
class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after
the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after registration.
d) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in related 
ﬁ
eld
b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a 
ﬁ
rst
class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualiﬁ
ed an equivalent National Examination or have qualiﬁ
ed in the written
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)
a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic
program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any
organization in India or abroad.
b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for
SC/ST) .
10.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme (QIP),
Defence Personnel
The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval
of Chairman, Senate.
10.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals
INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of
applying for admission.
The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and
when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The
applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualiﬁ
cations and
attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category.
Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.
The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural
Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for
admission to the programme. The department's recommendation will be sent to the Chairperson,
Senate through the Chairperson, AC.
10.2.9 Admission to Ph.D. (sponsored/external/part-time)
a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic
program in India or abroad.
b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for
SC/ST) .
e) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program.
f) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students
A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is oﬃ
cially sponsored by that institute or university to
complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-degree
student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other
academic facilities.
Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for speciﬁc courses provided the candidate
satisﬁes the minimum eligibility criteria speciﬁed in Section 10.2. The application must be routed
through the oﬃce of Dean R&D. A casual student can register up to a maximum of 9 credits in a
semester. On successful completion of the course, students will be awarded with a Course
Completion Certiﬁcate and Grade obtained. A casual student can also accumulate credits to
petition for a certiﬁcate or a diploma from IIT Jodhpur.
Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.
10.4 Reservation Policy
The reservation policy of the Government of India will be followed.
11. PG REGISTRATION
11.1 Limits on Registration
Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in diﬀ
erent programs:
● M.Sc.: A M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10
credits in a semester.
● M.Tech.: A M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table
11.1.

● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and
minimum credits that a M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/direct Ph.D. student can register are
equivalent to that of a M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.
● Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 11.2.

11.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)
A student admitted to a M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any
professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his
intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean (academic). The
candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status.
11.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. (Regular) Programme to M.Tech. (Part-time)
Programme
A full-time regular M.Tech. student may be allowed to change the registration to the part-time
M.Tech. programme after successful completion of third semester. A student requesting such a
conversion must:
i) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC; and
ii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work
11.3 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree
Programme
A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of
second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the end of
third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to dual degree in the fourth semester with
the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be required to complete
his/her candidacy requirements by the end of fifth semester.
All conditions of the M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All
such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.
11.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. Program
A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may be
allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be counted
towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.
11.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. Programme
A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time
Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:
i) have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;
ii) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;
iii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work.
11.5 Maximum Duration of a Program
● M.Sc. - 8 registered semester
● M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) - 12 registered semesters which
may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of
the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as that of sponsored candidates.
● Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14
registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive
(RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as
that of sponsored candidates.
● Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.
11.6 Course Registration
Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 11.1 and
Table 4.4.
The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during
her/his Masters or Bachelors program.
12. ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS
12.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programmes
The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial,
and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 12.1 and 12.2 for M.Sc. and M.Tech. Ph.D.
programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the
expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each
contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

12.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes
1) Compulsory Course (MC)
2) Programme Compulsory (PC)
2) Programme Elective (ME)
3) Open Elective (MO/OE)
4) Specialization Core (SC)
5) Specialization Elective (SE)
6) Specialization Stream Electives (SSE)
7) Micro Specialization Core (MSC)
8) Project works (MP)
9) Non-graded (NG)

The indicative maximum credits, a student registers in a semester, are notional. In addition to the
above minimum credit requirements through coursework, Ph. D. students are further required to
complete four compulsory non-graded (NG) courses before the open seminar. A student already
completed a NG course as part of his/her program need not register for the same course again.
The coursework requirements for IDRP Ph.D. students will be in line with Table 12.6.
While securing the minimum overall CGPA requirement in 12 (Ph.D. in departmental domains)/ 24
(Ph.D. in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline/direct Ph.D.) earned credits, a
course repeat process may be allowed for a maximum of 4 credits for Ph.D. students in
departmental domains and 8 credits for Ph.D. students in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a
Science discipline or for students enrolled in direct Ph.D. programme. The student can repeat
course(s) within the said credit limit in which he has obtained a pass grade but performance is
poor (secured grade is B- or lower). No replacement of course(s) in which the student has
secured pass grade and above is allowed. If the student opts to repeat a course, then the grade
secured in the next attempt will prevail.

12.8.2 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for Ph.D. students
A PhD student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA
less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average
(DGPA) where DGPA is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum
number of credits.
12.8.3 Continuing criteria for M.Sc.
M.Sc.- The student must earn at least 20 credits at the end of second semester for continuation in
the program.

13. LEAVE RULES
Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with a
medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of
the DRC.
13.1 Leave
A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid semester
break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter term or
mid-semester break.
A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch
An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch
The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC
without assistantship during that period.
13.2 Other Leaves
Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MoE. It will not be
counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme.
Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MoE.
13.3 Semester Withdrawal
May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of
four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.
In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for
only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of Academics
regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it
can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on medical
ground will not be counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme for the
student.
13.4 Academic Leave
Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as
1. Field work
2. Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library
3. Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
4. Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium
5. Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision
6. Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as
indicated in his research proposal
7. Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with sister institution in India or
abroad
All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is
granted. SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship
during academic leave.
● A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave.
● A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as
certified by SRC and approved by DRC.
14. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted
under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following:
14.1 M.Sc. Program
Merit-cum-Means fellowship as per Institute norms.
14.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program
A student having completed minimum credit requirements of a M.Sc. program at the end of
second year with
a. CGPA>=8
OR
b. have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.
14.3 M.Tech. Program
A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A
student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
14.4 Executive M Tech Program
Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the
Institute.
14.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with
regular Ph.D. students.
14.6 Ph.D. Program
A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the
norms of IIT Jodhpur.
a. A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with
GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD norms.
b. The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech. or equivalent
post-Bachelor’s degree
c. A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided
the student has met the qualifier requirement. Enhanced fellowship will commence from the
date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing
the qualifier requirement. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the above
requirements.
The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student will continue till thesis Defense or end of
the semester in which he/she has submitted thesis, whichever is earlier. The above is permissible
subject to assistantship/fellowship available in the semester under question as per
MHRD/CSIR/DST/UGC rule.
15. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND EVALUATION OF
M.TECH./M.SC. PROJECT
● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first
semester.
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to regular
supervisor(s).
● Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee
consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research
with at least one-member external to the department (may be outside the Institute also).
DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. Same committee may
examine more than one thesis. The external member can be on VC. DRC will ensure that
the Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.
● A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer
semester following 2nd semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech
project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be
evaluated by his supervisor.
16. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PH. D. /M. TECH.-PH. D. DUAL DEGREE
PROGRAM
16.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)
16.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates
The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research.
There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the
candidate at the time of selection.
16.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)
● Ph. D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be
assigned at the time of selection.
● Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. - Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification
must be completed by the end of the first semester.
● The Convener, DRC (Department Research and Postgraduate Committee)/Coordinator,
IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Program Committee) would advise until the student is
assigned to regular supervisor(s).
● There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional
supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.
● A supervisor from outside the institute, before qualifier, may be appointed on the
request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean
(Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.
● The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and
Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial
point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor.
16.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the
DRC/IRC shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the
student to take care of the administrative requirements.
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an
additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor.
● The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the
supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.
● The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as supervisor and
will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared the qualifier
before supervisor’s retirement/resignation.
16.1.4 Composition of Departmental Research Committee (DRC)
The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs of
the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed by
the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by a Professor/Associate Professor nominated by the Head of
the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The
DRC has to be approved by the Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the
convenor of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years.
16.1.5 Composition of Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC)
The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the
chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a
member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure
for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics).
16.2 Change of Research Supervisor
Change of supervisor(s) under exceptional circumstances shall be permitted by Dean
(Academics) on recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of
(i) the student (ii) the present supervisor(s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s).
If required, realignment of student’s research program will happen under supervision of the
DRC/IRC.
16.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)
16.3.1 Composition of SRC
● The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members
conversant with the field of research with at least one-member external to the
department (may be outside the Institute also).
● A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the
supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by the Dean (Academics).
● The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and
the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean
(Academics).
● The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
● Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through
the DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record.
● The SRC and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the
thesis.
● The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the
completion of the program.
16.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)
Academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the SRC and
peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii) A Poster
Presentation open to all. SRC will award Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based upon (i) and
(ii). Two consecutive non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration.
For implementational convenience, the academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for
conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following groupings of students and
scheduling guidelines are suggested
1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working
Date of September of every year
2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working
Date of February of every year
The first APM will be conducted after successful completion of qualifier requirements. Those
students who have got 6 months extension to complete qualifier requirements, for them APM
can be scheduled even after a semester from the date of completion of qualifier
requirements. Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be
reported by supervisor(s) through the SRC for record.
Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and
approved by Dean (academics)
16.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student
The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a
Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.
1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 12.8.1
2. Cleared comprehensive examination
3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research
4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal
The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and in any
case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the Ph. D.
program. Part-time and direct Ph.D. candidates will need to complete qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the seventh semester. M.Tech.-Ph.D. candidates will need to complete
qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester and in any case not later than
the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the program. For M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual
degree students, the 16 credits associated with the M.Tech. project II are to be converted to the
RP.
16.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student
● The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the
student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the
field of research.
● The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination
Committee of the Department/IDRP.
● The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.
● Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting the comprehensive examination.
Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. Course
content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and Senate. The
syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses
offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in
that area.
● The SRC will specify a set of three papers as comprehensive requirements for a particular
student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.
● The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student
within two weeks of SRC formation.
● All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can
coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may
decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.
● A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed
the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.
● If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first
attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear during
the next scheduled comprehensive examination as per the academic calendar. For valid
medical or unforeseen reasons, if a student is not able to register for the comprehensive
examination, the comprehensive examination may be rescheduled within that semester
with prior approval to the Dean/Associate Dean (PG- Programs).
● For clearing the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all
papers.
Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:
● Ph.D.: within 3 semesters
● Direct Ph.D. and Part-Time Ph.D.: within 5 semesters
16.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)
Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State of
Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area.
The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory grade in
SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal. The State of the Art
seminar must be completed before finalization of the research proposal. For M.Tech.-Ph.D.
students, the presentation in M.Tech. Project I will be considered as SOTA.
16.5.3 Research Proposal
Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion
of SOTA. The Research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to
research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the
candidate.
16.6 Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree
A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D.
degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such students
who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis

16.7 Relaxation in M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program
● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier
requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also
convert into part-time/external Ph.D. students and exit with M.Tech degree if all
conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.
● The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if
SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends continuance of registration.
16.8 Cancellation of Registration
● The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC or
who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.
● The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the
maximum permissible period specified in Section 11.5 will be liable for cancellation.
16.9 Synopsis
● Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal close door
assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC.
● The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied about the quality and
quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.
● Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis
report.
● Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar
date. If required, an extension of three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics)
on the recommendation of SRC.
● If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be
asked to present the synopsis again.
● On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in
4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis, the
student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in the
required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for
consideration of the SRC.
● The student should have at least two publications in Scopus indexed journals and/or A+
conferences for Engineering and Science Departments. Requirements for the
Department of Humanities and School of Management & Entrepreneurship will be
specified separately.
16.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation
The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty Members
from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in which the
student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, following guidelines should be followed
● The examiners shall have at least 6 years Post-Ph.D. experience;
● No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and
● The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.
● Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners.
● The Chairman, Senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of
which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these
examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. In addition, the SRC and
Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.
● The Indian examiners shall attend in person the Thesis Defense.
● The examiners shall submit a written report on the Thesis within a period of two months
from the date of receipt of the Thesis.
● If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.
● If any of the examiners rejects the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration.
The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special
circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.
program.
● If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be
awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the
Ph.D. program.
● If an examiner suggests revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis after
the revision within a prescribed time period of 6 months in consultation with the
Supervisor(s).
● When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the
Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the
suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the
Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.
● The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within India
and other Faculty Members, who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the
student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their
recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to the Senate, to consider the
award of Ph.D. degree to the student.

17.2 Academic
The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned
the minimum credits as per Section 12.3 for M. Sc., Section 12.4 for M. Tech., Section 12.5 for M.
Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 12.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 12.7 for Ph.D.,
while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 12.8.
17.3 No Dues Clearance
The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as
deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).
17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if
there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.
17.5 Award of Degrees
17.5.1 Provisional Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can be
provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman,
Senate.
17.5.2 Degree Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is
recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate
degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its
approval.
17.6 Withdrawal of Degree
Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation
requirements is detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors
for withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student.
18. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the
right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes
at IIT-Jodhpur

Appointment of Supervisor:
• Any faculty member at AIIMS/IIT Jodhpur holding fulltime position can be
designated as Supervisor.
• Faculty members of IIT and AIIMS can supervise Ph.D. students as per the
regulations of respective institute.
• The faculty member who himself/herself is registered for Ph.D. programme will not
be eligible for the supervision of Ph.D.
• There will be at-least one supervisor each from both AIIMS Jodhpur and IIT
Jodhpur. A maximum of three supervisors are allowed.
• External supervisor with at least two years of post-graduate teaching experience/2
years post PhD research experience as medical/non-medical
researcher/scientist/faculty member may be appointed as supervisor provided
he/she has original/significant research contribution in the field.
1. Qualifier Requirement and plan for thesis work
For the dual degree:
Step 1: After 1st semester-
The candidate has to identify the need from immersion+ problem definition
emphasizing scope for innovation and development
Step 2: After 4th Semester and by 5th Semester-
SOTA seminar + detailed presentation on scientific challenges and innovation model
of the identified problem
Step 3: After 6th Semester and by 7th Semester
Present translation agenda and/or business plan
Step 4: After 7th Semester
To take a call while presenting, whether to opt for degree with translational
component/ product development
OR
Opt for incubation with a business plan
For Ph.D. degree:
• Step 1: After 1st Semester
• The candidate has to identify the need from immersion+ problem definition
emphasizing scope for innovation and development
• Step 2: By end of 2nd Semester
• Present foundation of the identified problem of product development
• Step 3: By end of 3rd Semester
• Present SOTA seminar
3
• Step 4: By end of 4th Semester
• Present complete plan for translation/prototyping the device
• Step 5: By end of 7th Semester
• To take a call while presenting, whether to opt for degree with translational
component /product development
OR
• Opt for incubation with a business plan
Assessment of the work of the candidates
• Annual progress work during the thesis work shall be assessed by the Doctoral
committee and a report will be submitted to the Dean through the supervisor.
• The doctoral committee will be formed after 1st Semester and before end of second
semester
Thesis and examination
• The thesis will be submitted after an open seminar presented by the candidate and
the approval of the Doctoral committee.
• At least two patents (or equivalent IP right document) filed is essential for
submitting the thesis.
• Each candidate shall submit four print copies and pdf format of the thesis duly
certified by the Supervisor and the Co-Supervisor(s) for evaluation after completion
of the required period.
• A panel of examiners shall be submitted before the expected date of submission of
the thesis, by the supervisor, in consultation with the Doctoral committee. The
panel shall include eight examiners who are experts in the field of the study
undertaken by the candidate (three of these shall be from abroad).
• The supervisors may go for the consent of the examiners before proposing the
names in the examiner list.
• In the thesis evaluation form, the points of judgment of the thesis can be the
novelty/contribution of the product development/translation
• After approval of thesis by the external and the internal examiners the viva voce
examination will be held to adjudge the proficiency of the candidate in the
subject(s) allied to the candidate’s field of work.
• If the thesis is rejected by more than one examiner, it will stand rejected and shall
not be referred to any other examiner. However, in the event the thesis is rejected
by only one examiner, it will be referred to another examiner from among the
approved panel. In case the thesis is approved by this examiner, it will be
considered as unanimously approved, else the respective Chairman, Senate may
advise course of action.
4
• If one or more examiner recommends re-submission/modification of thesis, the
same shall be done within a maximum period of six months from the date of
intimation to the candidate.
• If the report from all the external examiners is not received within three months,
a copy of thesis will be sent to another examiner from amongst the approved panel.
• The thesis
• defense will be conducted in the presence of Doctoral committee and one of the
external examiners who has examined the thesis.
Credit Requirements for the Ph.D. degree
• Candidates enrolled in PhD, other than through Master’s programme : Compulsory
courses of Master’s Programme + 6 Elective Credits (Thesis 48)
• Candidates through Master’s programme —6 Elective Credits (Thesis 48)
Result
(a) If the Examiners are not satisfied with the performance of the candidate in the
above examination, the candidate will have to reappear for another viva vice
examination after a period of two months provided such specific
recommendation is made by the board of Examiners.
(b)The candidate shall be declared eligible for the award of the Degree of Doctor
of Philosophy only on the unanimous recommendations of the members of the
Board of Examiners at the viva voce examination.
Award of Degree:
The transcript will be issued by the institute in which the candidate will be registered. The
degree will be awarded jointly by AIIMS Jodhpur and IIT Jodhpur in alternate
Convocations.
The degree certificate will be issued and signed by competent authorities from both the
Institutes.

There has been an increasing need to embed innovation components in various academic programs.
Traditionally, research-based academic programs emphasize on scholarly publications. However, it is
also important to recognize other forms of contributions, i.e. patents, technology development,
entrepreneurship, etc., as outcomes of research initiatives. In view of this, the Institute has started MS
by Research programs in cross-disciplinary, multi-disciplinary as well as application-directed areas. The
research problems increasingly require a multidisciplinary approach to solve complex problems of
interest or propose solutions leading to new innovations and entrepreneurship ventures. Today, we
need in many cases diverse disciplines to engage in a spectrum of research-based activities ranging from
scientific to social issues that challenge contemporary society- establishing a consistency between
diverse academic spaces. A considerable demand exists for such professionals who can synthesize more
than one discipline and create teams of academicians and scholars that enrich the overall educational
and research experience.
M.S. by Research Programs are expected to be designed for:
i) Innovative Research Outcomes in cross-disciplinary / multi-disciplinary areas. Such Programs are
expected to be offered by schools or centres synergising diverse academic disciplines; admission will
be through the academic unit specified admission process.
ii) Innovation Driven Outcomes leading to EIR’s and / or Start-Up’s; admission will be through the
academic unit specified admission process.
iii) Targeted Deliveries linked to projects sponsored by external agencies. Only project fellows
appointed in a delivery-oriented project can register in part-time mode through a DRC/SRC/CRC
monitored selection process.
iv) The regular M.S. by Research students can be in the Centres and CoE only. The Department can admit
M.S. by Research students supported by the R&D project. Only one (01) M.S. by Research student can be
allocated to a faculty.

1.1. Registration Kept Alive (RKA)

A student admitted to an M.S. by Research program who has at least completed minimum credit
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional
activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his intent of RKA before
the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The candidate has to pay appropriate
registration fees for RKA status (similar to M.Tech. students). A student can maintain RKA status for a
maximum of 6 semesters.

1.2 Change of Registration from M.S. by Research Programme to Ph.D. Programme

The M.S. by Research Degree can be upgraded to Ph.D. based on the CGPA (>7.5) and progress of the student
after 3 Semesters for regular students; however, transition will require continuation of the same work and
the student has to satisfy regular PhD requirements. All conditions of Ph.D. degree program will be
applicable to all such students. All such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.
1.3 Maximum Duration of a Program

A full-time M.S. by Research student can complete the program between 2 years (minimum) to 4 years
(maximum). A part-time student can complete the program between 3 years (minimum) to 5 years
(maximum)

2 ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS

2.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programs
The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and
practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 2.1. Each credit is associated with the number of contact
hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each
contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

2.2. Academic Credit Requirements for M.S. by Research Students
A student enrolled in the M.S. Program will require to complete 24 credits through course work, including
the 4 NG credits, and 36 credits through research; The coursework credits may include elective courses-
suggested by the School/Centers/SRC- and a presentation towards the assigned/defined research problem

2.4 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for M.S. by Research students
A M.S. by Research student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA
less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) where
DGPA is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum number of credits

Faculty Members
Bhabani K Satapathy
 About

Dr. Bhabani K. Satapathy is a professor in the Department of Materials Engineering. He did his Ph.D. from IIT Delhi in the area of polymer composites and specifically on the tribological aspects of composites for automotive braking applications. He subsequently pursued his research career as a Postdoctoral fellow at Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research Dresden (IPF Dresden) and in Mechanics of Functional Materials (MfM) group of Institute of Material Science and Technology at Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany. He also has an M. Tech. degree in Polymer Science and Engineering from IIT Delhi. His main research interests are on phase behaviour, tribology and fracture mechanics of polymer based blends, composites, block copolymers and allied materials. 

Research Interests:

Morphology and Phase Behaviour of Block Copolymers, Polymer Blends and Composites, Micromechanics, Fracture and Fatigue of Polymer Nano-composites, Tribology of Polymer Based Materials, Biotribology, Thermo-Mechanical Behaviour of Biomaterials.

Ravi K R
 About

 

Dr. Ravi K R is a Professor at IIT Jodhpur. He completed his B.Tech. in Metallurgical Engineering at Madras University. He completed his PhD. in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur in 2009.

Dr. Ravi K R works in the broad areas of Additive Manufacturing, Computational thermodynamics in alloy design, Biodegradable magnesium alloys, and Self-cleaning coating.

Abir Bhattacharyya
 About

Dr. Abir Bhattacharyya is an Associate Professor at  IIT Jodhpur. He completed his M.E. in Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Science in 2011. He completed his PhD. in Mechanical Engineering at the University of Florida in 2015

Jaiveer Singh
 About

Dr. Jaiveer Singh is an Associate Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He is also an affiliate faculty and a Program Management Committee member of the Centre for Medical Technologies at IIT Jodhpur. His research primarily focuses on microstructure and texture evolution, thermo-mechanical processing, mechanical behavior of materials, and the design and development of light alloys and biomaterials. He is also actively involved in research on additive manufacturing technologies used for patient-specific implants.

Before joining IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Singh worked as a Research Professor at Sunchon National University, Suncheon, Republic of Korea. During his tenure there, he investigated deformation and fracture mechanisms in magnesium (Mg) alloys under mini-V-bending and Erichsen testing at room temperature. He received his Ph.D. in Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science from IIT Bombay in 2015. His doctoral research focused on the microstructural and textural evolution during deformation in zirconium. To date, he has published more than 50 research articles in SCI/SCIE-indexed journals and has 5 patents filed. He also serves as a reviewer for several esteemed journals and international conferences.

Saurabh Nene
 About

Dr. Saurabh Sanjay Nene is an Associate Professor at IIT Jodhpur. He completed his M.Tech. at Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay in 2012. He completed his PhD. at Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay and Monash University Australia in 2016.

His field of research is: Alloy Design, Additive Manufacturing, HIgh Entropy Alloys, Friction Stir Welding and Processing

Abhay Gupta
 About

Dr. Abhay Gupta is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur. He completed his B. Tech degree from IIT Roorkee in 2014 and later obtained his M. Tech degree and Ph.D. in Materials Engineering from IISc Bangalore in 2022. His Ph.D. research work primarily focused on the correlation between electrochemical and microstructural properties within electroplated Tin-based coatings.

Before joining IIT Jodhpur, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Lorraine, France, and the University of Quebec, Canada. During his postdoctoral research, he focused on clean energy technologies, with a particular emphasis on green hydrogen production. His work focuses on proton exchange membrane (PEM) water electrolyzers, including the development of electrodes, the study of oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalysts, and the enhancement of device performance through coatings for porous transport layers (PTLs) and bipolar plates (BPPs). He also examines corrosion behaviour in electrolyzer environments and material durability under prolonged operation.

Dr. Abhay has also worked in the R&D divisions of L&T Green Energy, Mumbai, and Tata Steel's Metaliks Division, Kharagpur, after completing his Ph.D., and at SAIL, Bokaro, after obtaining his B.Tech degree.

The primary focus of his research group is:

    Performance evaluation of PEM electrolyzer components for green hydrogen production.
    Electrode fabrication for water electrolyzers.
    Electrochemistry – corrosion analysis. 

Amitava Banerjee

About

Dr. Amitava Banerjee is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur (IITJ). He joined IITJ in December 2021 after completing his postdoc as a Director's Postdoctoral Fellow in the Materials Science and Technology Division at Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA. Dr. Banerjee earned his Ph.D. in materials modeling for energy conversion and storage from Uppsala University, Sweden, in 2019. For his Ph.D. thesis, he received the Graduate Student Silver Award from the Materials Research Society (MRS), USA and the "Bjurzons Premium" prize from Uppsala University for the best Ph.D. thesis in the natural sciences. He completed his M.Tech. from IIT Kanpur, with CGPA of 10 out of 10, and was honored with both the Academic Excellence Award and the Gold Medal from IIT Kanpur, as well as recognition from the Indian Institute of Metals (IIM) with Gold Medal. Dr. Banerjee also holds an M.Sc. in Materials Science, graduating with first position with distinction from Sardar Patel University in Gujarat. Additionally, he earned a B.Sc. in Industrial Chemistry, finishing in first class—first position from Ramakrishna Mission Vidyamandira in Belur Math, under Calcutta University.

Overview of Research Domain

Dr. Banerjee specializes in density functional theory, molecular dynamics, and materials informatics for designing catalysts for solar fuel production and storage. He employs genetic algorithms to screen organic structures for battery electrodes and studies defect thermodynamics and kinetics to understand oxide growth. He has developed several computational methodologies for designing energy materials. In a board, Dr. Banerjee's research focuses on materials modelling for oxide growth (material degradation), energy conversion, and storage using the avant-grade computational method.

More specifically on:

    Random structure search 
    Solar fuel production, photocatalyst- Water Splitting
    Catalytic reaction mechanism (HER, OER, ORR, NRR, CO2 reduction)
    Hybrid perovskites solar cell-structural modification and stability
    Organic crystal structure search for organic green battery
    Thermodynamics and kinetics of battery/supercapacitor material
    Oxide growth: Formation and transport of cationic and anionic defects in the oxide
    Diffusion through metal-oxide interface and grain-boundary
    2D Materials, 3D porous structures for various application
    Nano-grinding/surface finishing of ceramic materials

Anurag Sharma
 About

Dr. Anurag Sharma is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering (jointly with Mechanical Engineering) at IIT Jodhpur. He obtained his Ph.D. in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore (2021–2025). He earned his M.Tech. in Materials Science and Engineering from IIT Gandhinagar (2019–2021) and holds a B.Tech. (Honors) in Mechanical Engineering from Government Engineering College Ajmer (2015–2019).

His Ph.D. research primarily focused on enhancing the cyclic and impact performance of thermoplastic composites using filler reinforcement. During his doctoral studies, he gained collaborative research experience with Leonardo Helicopters and the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. He has received several notable accolades, including the NTU Research Scholarship and the IITGN Institute Fellowship.

At IIT Jodhpur, his research focuses on advancing composite materials for next-generation structural components. His research interests include fiber-reinforced thermoplastic composites; fatigue and impact behavior of composites; multifunctional composite design; composite manufacturing and processing; structural testing; and damage mechanics and failure analysis. His work aims to develop high-performance, lightweight, and sustainable composite materials through innovative design, manufacturing, and performance evaluation.

Ongoing Projects 
Deep-Tech Biodesign Centre: A Multi-disciplinary centre to train, nurture and transform clinicians and engineers into the Deep-Tech innovators in the field of Medical/Health Technology
Optical based in-situ monitoring for porosity detection during laser cladding and additive manufacturing of stainless steel
Developing Endoscope Socket to provide uninterpreted endoscopic visual field to ENT doctor for diagnosing patients with minimal discomfort.
Oxidation and quenching studies of Zry-4 clad material with and without coating
Designing lightweight and highly formable Mg-Li/Zn/Ca-RE based alloys using the CALPHAD method
Design and processing of non-corrosive and cost-effective complex concentrated alloys (CCAs) for biomedical applications
Novel 2-D nanostructures involving borophene and clay, their, organic and inorganic hybrids, and heterostructures for optoelectronic, magneto-optics photo/eletrocatalysis, and water purifications
A Non-invasive Breath Analyser for Kidney Dysfunction Screening
Large Scale Synthesis of Borophene for Energy Storage Application
Development of Ti-HEA with high strength and formability at room and high temperatures
Boron Carbide coating on graphitic tiles for first wall protection of ADITYA_U Tokamak
Effect of rolling parameters for improving electrical conductivity of Al alloys
Effect of rolling on mechanical properties of Cu-Ti Alloy Strips
Design of next generation superalloys for 3D printed turbine components
Molecularly engineered free standing Borophene as a versatile Nanotheranostics platform to combat localized cancers
Sb2S3 Photovoltaic Device: Pioneering Interface Engineering and Optoelectronic Properties Enhancement
Chalcogenide-Perovskite (BaZrS3) based Photovoltaic Devices
Design and development of an indigenous two-photon polymerization equipment for 3D printing of nanostructures.
Integrated application of in-situ monitoring, CALPHAD modeling, and ultrasonic treatment for predicting and mitigating the porosity and hot tearing defects formed during the additive manufacturing of Inconel 718 and AlSi10Mgalloys
The Effects of Shot Peening Parameters on Residual Stress Evolution in a Through-Hardened and a Case-Hardened Aerospace Bearing Steel
Design and Development of Advanced High Strength Steel for Enhanced Performance in Aero-engine Gears.

Completed Projects 
Development of Transparent, Durable superhydrophobic-coating for self-cleaning of Endoscope
Novel in-situ volume contractible metal halide negative electrodes for high performance lithium-ion batteries
Understanding the deformation mechanisms under in-plane shear and role of pre-twinning on formability behavior of AZ31-xCa Mg alloy sheets
Study of the Effects of Stress-State and Strain-Rate on Constitutive Response of Polymer Gels via Experiments and Continuum Mechanics Modeling
Thermoelectric Performance Study Using First-Principles Calculations Based Methods
Design and Fabrication of Indigenous Powder Fed Metal Additive Manufacturing Machine
Quantitative assessment of Hot tearing characteristics of Aerospace Magnesium Alloys
Differential Phase Contrast in Electron Magnetic Circular Dichroism in Transmission Electron Microscopy
Large Scale Synthesis of Freestanding 2D Borophene Atomic Sheets and its Hybrids for Conducting Tapes
A High-Throughput Structure-Sensitive Designing of Electrocatalysts for Next-generation Alternative Fuel-"Green Ammonia"-Synthesis
Grain boundary engineering for improvement of high temperature strength and ductility in FCC alloys for structural applications
Investigation of weldability and hydrogen embrittlement phenomenon in high-strength bainitic steel
Design of ultralight, cost-effective high entropy alloys with transformation induced plasticity
Development of High Capacity Advanced Borophene Oxide based Supercapacitor


Collaborations

    CSIR National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR-NML)
    Indira Gandhi Center for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam (IGCAR, Kalpakkam)
    Metallizing Equipment Co. Pvt. Ltd. (MECPL)
    Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Hyderabad (DMRL, Hyderabad)
    National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, Trivandrum (NIIST, Trivandrum)
    Vectraform engineering & solutions pvt ltd, Coimbatore
    Oil India Limited, Jodhpur


Welcome To The Department of Physics

The subject of Physics is inherently a natural science subject based on strong theoretical foundations and experimental findings. The subject closely intersects with almost all the branches of engineering and the current research activities of physics across the world made a huge impact on new, advanced, and emerging technologies. Keeping these facts into consideration, our Department is committed to imparting high-quality education based on a strong academic curriculum comprising elements of theoretical concepts, laboratory experiments, and most importantly hands-on experiments. The graduates of the Department are expected to have deep insight into the domain of Physics together with a strong bent of mind to pursue cutting-edge research and translate it into technology.

We offer a broad range of undergraduate and postgraduate programs. Our 4 Year BS in Physics with specialization is a technology-oriented science program and offers specialization in physics-based emerging technology domains. The program also has the flexibility to convert into a 5 Year BS + M.Tech. dual degree course. At the postgraduate level, we have four-degree programs viz. M.Sc. (2 years), M.Sc.-M.Tech Dual Degree in Physics and Materials Engineering. The dual degree program also has additional two specializations namely Functional Materials and Computational Materials Engineering. Finally, our Ph.D. program empowers scholars to pursue research in various domains.
Research Areas

The department has a very good blend of highly qualified young and experienced faculty members in the areas of advanced physics. The department is also equipped with a number of thematic laboratories which enable the students to carry out high-end and impactful theoretical and applied research in the following focus areas:

High Energy Physics and Astrophysics

Theoretical research in domains; Flavour physics, Astrophysics, Particle physics, Cosmology, and Dark matter and Dark energy. Experimental research in flavor physics with the Belle II Experiment.

Quantum Physics

Open Quantum Systems, Theoretical and Experimental aspects of Quantum Optics & Quantum Information, Quantum Field Theory, Quantum Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Cosmology.

Condensed Matter and Plasma Physics Group

Experimental and Theoretical Research on Molecular electronics, Organic electronics, Cold Plasma Technologies and applications, Energy Storage, Solar cells, Light emitting diodes, Solar water splitting, Soft Matters, Statistical Physics, Computational Physics, Multiscale Modelling, Phase ordering dynamics, Glasses, Amorphous solids, Polymers and Solid Electrolyte materials, Physics of Living Matter, Active Matter Physics, Functional Materials, Materials Design and Engineering, Nanomagnetism and Multiferroics.

Optics and Photonics

Theoretical and Experimental Research in Nano Photonics, Light in disordered media, Ultrafast Optics, Nonlinear Optics, Topological Singularities, Specially Optical Fibers, Photonic sensors, Time Dynamic systems, Terahertz generation and application, Transient and Steady-state Spectroscopy, Bound state in the continuum, Disorder Photons and Light Matter Interaction and Ceramic materials for high energy laser applications.

Candidates interested in pursuing Ph.D., please go through the Research groups and visit the individual faculty's home pages. The application can be submitted with this link.
Infrastructure

The department is equipped with high-end research equipment which includes SQUID magnetometer, Physical Property Measurement Systems (PPMS), Raman Spectrometer, and Scanning Tunnelling Microscope (STM) besides a host of other advanced characterization equipment which is available at the Centre for Research & Development of Scientific Instruments (CRDSI).
Collaborations

The department is having close collaboration with a number of National and International agencies including DRDO, ISRO, DAE, CSIR, DST, and SERB. Department Faculties also have collaborations with various Institutes of National and International repute, namely TIFR, IIT Bombay, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT BHU, Central University of Rajasthan, University of Montreal, Canada, University of Warsaw Poland, Brookhaven National Laboratory USA, ETH Zurich Switzerland, IMEM Parma Italy, INFN Turino, Italy, CMU Pittsburgh USA, Belle II KEK Japan etc.


Latest News

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Provisionally Selected and Waitlisted Candidates for Ph.D. Admission - Academic Year 2025 - 26 (Semester I)
2 	List of Shortlisted Candidates for PhD Admission 2025-26, Department of Physics
3 	Provisionally Selected Candidates for AY 2024-25 Semester II Ph.D. Admission in Physics
4 	PhD admission (2024-Sem II); List of Candidates shortlisted for Written/Interview
5 	Ph.D. admission (AY2024-25, Semester I): The List of Provisionally Selected Candidates (Click here)
6 	Ph.D. admission (AY 2024-25, Semester I): Shortlisted Candidates for Written test/ Interview 

1. B.S. in Physics with Specialization

A Unique Undergraduate Program
Introduction

Our BS program is designed for highly motivated students interested in basic science and cutting-edge technologies in the broad discipline of physics blended with engineering and wishes for a flexible program to consider a variety of challenging career paths through capability-linked specializations in Energy, Photonics, Plasma Technologies, Quantum Technologies and Entrepreneurship.


Objectives

1 | An academic path to..

    Enter into the graduate programs (e.g. MS or Ph.D.)
    Research in fundamental and technology/application oriented domains
    Career in scientific or academic profession


2 | An industrial path to..

    R&D in relevant industries 
    Leadership through lifelong learning


3 | An entrepreneurial path to..

    Entrepreneurship as specialization (SME)
    Develop new technologies based products
    Initiate Deep Tech start-up companies

Fellowships

For candidates with AIR under 5000 in combined merit rank (JEE Advanced)

    S N Bose Fellowship of 50,000/- INR per semester, consistent with 8.0 or above CGPA in all semesters.
    One fully paid International Conference/Internship (2-month duration during Summer Term)


Specialization

Our Physics BS students explore subjects critical to advancement in today’s needs from everyday common know-how to critical problems in different inter/multi-disciplinary domains using the fundamental and applied physics knowledge blended for present and future complex issues/challenges. One of the key salient features of the BS Physics program at the IIT Jodhpur is that the curriculum offers enormous flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice. The Department’s core specializations are designed to enable students to lead future technological innovations addressing the emerging industrial and societal challenges in following domains.

    The 4-year degree program also offers additional opportunity to pursue diverse and challenging carrier options for e.g. in Entrepreneurship (#5), who will be getting experience in converting their ideas into deep-tech start ups.
    A B.S. student having opted for specific specialization with CGPA 6 or more at the end of the 7th semester and fulfilling minimum credit requirements may be allowed to switch to B.S.- M. Tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the 8th semester.


1 | Advanced Energy Materials

    Energy harvesting materials and devices
    Utilization of renewable and non-renewable energy sources
    Optimized devices
    Exploration of future applications


2 | Plasma Technologies

    Plasma-based controlled thermonuclear fusion
    Industrial plasma applications
    Laser plasma and accelerators

3 | Photonics

    Deep insights to emerging photonics technologies (ultra-fastchips, mid-infrared lasers etc)
    Redefining Quantum Technology (Photonic Devices as Fundamental Components)
    Tera-hertz (THz) technologies for imaging, sensing and communications


4 | Quantum Technologies

    Femtosecond Lasers Facility (Study of higher entangled photons)
    Acquire skill-sets in various domains;
        Quantum Computing
        Quantum Communication
        Quantum Sensing
        Quantum Materials

5 | Entrepreneurship

    Offered by school of management (SME) IIT Jodhpur
    Placement opportunities
    Acquire skills in various entrepreneurship areas
        Starting up a new Venture
        Ideation & Prototyping
        New Venture Financing, Business Plan Phase-I and Phase II
        IPR & Legal Issues for Start-ups
        Systems Engineering and Project Management

Unique Features

    Technology oriented science program and specialization in physics based emerging technology domains.
    Strong foundations of fundamental as well as applied concepts of physics enabling to excel in physics driven technologies
    Flexible Curriculum Integrating Engineering Design aspect.
    Translating projects and ideas into Innovation through startup, technology park or industry collaborations.
    Emphasis on theoretical concepts, computational skills and hands-on experience.
    Interdisciplinary research and product development ecosystem.
    Common first year courses with B.Tech. programs and opportunityâ?ª of changing to B.Tech. program.

Graduate attributes

The Graduates of the UG program in Physics are expected to have the following attributes:

    Strong foundations of fundamental as well as applied concepts of physics enabling to excel in physics driven technologies.
    Ability to acquire new knowledge of physics and integrate with engineering concepts to create new and innovative technologies for current and future applications.
    Ability to apply critical scientific thinking and engineering skills to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems in applied areas blended with engineering practices.
    Ability to apply principles of physics in the domain of Energy materials and devices with a focus on generation, storage and management.
    Ability to engage and actively participate in the upcoming areas of Quantum Information and related research domains of Quantum Technologies.
    Preparedness to participate in future technological developments in photonics and optical communications beyond 5G including Terahertz technology.
    Ability to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements and assume leadership roles within academic, industrial, or entrepreneurial environments.
    Aware of ethical issues, societal needs, and problems and conduct themselves as responsible professionals.

Learning outcomes

The Graduates of the UG program in Physics will be able:

    To acquire knowledge of fundamental and applied physics principles along with the required understanding of computing, mathematics, and engineering.
    To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, and fundamental physics tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory exercises and design projects.
    To apply the concepts of mathematics, physics including Quantum technologies and advanced computing tools, to design complex engineering systems containing hardware and software (including Quantum algorithms) modules.
    To acquire knowledge of fundamental and advanced concepts of Photonics and Terahertz technologies for communications, devices towards medical applications, sensing, quantum technologies, spectroscopy and imaging.
    To gain an in-depth understanding of concepts of materials and devices for energy generation and storage, integration of energy sub-systems and next generation communications.
    To perform a critical literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.
    To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.
    To develop technical presentation skills and communicate effectively.
    To develop an attitude for product design and entrepreneurial activities.

2. B.Tech (First Year)

The Department is also actively engaged in teaching regular physics course viz. Electromagnetism and Optics (PHL1010) to B.Tech. I year students. The Department is also offering Preparatory Physics Courses (PHL0010 and PHL0020) at IIT Jodhpur catering to the requirements of the students of various IITs. Also, B.Tech. I Year students perform some interesting experiments in the Physics Laboratory Course (PHP1010). This course is of immense importance wherein the students are able to understand and appreciate that how the physical principles are important for various engineering disciplines and how they can be applied in various engineering problems. Strong emphasis is given on two very important aspects viz. (i) fundamental principles of physics for each of the experiments and (ii) proper recording of the observations and their documentation. Additionally, various compulsory and elective courses offered by the Department are also open to B.Tech. students as elective courses. From the large pool of courses relating to Fundamental Physics, Multidisciplinary Science & Technology and Engineering Physics, the students can register for the courses of their choice subject to fulfillment of necessary guidelines given in the Academic Regulations of the Institute.

Postgraduate Program 


Department of Physics at IIT Jodhpur is offering following two post-graduate programs

    M.Sc. (Physics) – 2 years
    MSc (Physics)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) Dual Degree Program - 4 years

1. M.Sc. (Physics) – 2 years


Introduction

The Department of Physics at IIT Jodhpur is offering a 2-year M.Sc. program. The candidates to this program are admitted through JAM examination. The main objective of the program is to create a pool of professionals with very strong fundamentals in the domain of physics. Based on the experience of teaching advanced physics for the past several years, the Department has evolved a unique combination of program structure, courses and teaching pedagogy which not only allows the students to acquire in-depth learning of the concepts of physics and their application potential but also gives them freedom to choose the courses as per their interests from the large pool of elective courses being offered by the Department. These electives can be from three different sets of the courses viz. advanced level fundamental physics, multidisciplinary science and technology and engineering physics.

The program gives strong emphasis on the experiential learning aspects. As many as four labs and two hands-on courses are offered in the first year itself. In the hands-on exercise the students are given some interesting problems of physics. These problems are designed in a way that students learn to apply the concept of physics, make use of innovative approaches and develop creative thinking. Such activities provide much needed practical learning which help the students to effectively comprehend the complex theoretical concepts of physics. After completion of the program the students would have acquired the knowledge and skill sets to pursue their career, as per their interest, in the directions like advanced level research in fundamental and applied physics, R&D in multidisciplinary science & technology, higher education in engineering domains or availing job opportunities in government, public and private sectors.

Objective

The major objective of the programme is to bring out professionals having knowledge of basic laws of nature together with strong fundamentals in the core area of physics viz. Classical Mechanics, Quantum Mechanics, Condensed Matter Physics, Electromagnetism, Computational Physics, Statistical Physics, Electronics, Atomic and Nuclear Physics and advanced level topics such as Quantum Information Processing, Quantum Computing, High Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Plasma Physics, Nanotechnology, Nonlinear Optics, etc. Further objective of the program is to inculcate certain specific enabling skill sets to prepare the students to take up challenges in any one or more functional domains viz.

(i) Academics;

(ii) Basic and Applied Research;

(iii) Research & Development;

(iv) Engineering & Technology and

(v) Industry.


Expected Graduate Attributes

    In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of physics.
    Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Science & Technology viz. Space Science, Medical Physics, Plasma Science, Quantum Technologies, Advanced Materials Science, Computational Techniques, etc.
    Ability to apply the acquired knowledge of Physics to Engineering Problems.
    Understanding of basic tools of computational physics and their application in various domains of physics and engineering.
    Ability to perform the experiments and analyze the experimental data based on acquired knowledge in the domains of electronics, atomic and nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, optics and Lasers, and other advanced topics.
    Skills to demonstrate basic principles of physics by use of simple experimental as well as high end experimental techniques.
    Ability to develop advanced functional materials and carry out their characterization.
    Ability to design, fabricate and characterize device structures such as sensors, solar cells, optical components, etc. for various applications.
    Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication.
    Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 


Learning Outcomes

    Knowledge and deep understanding of principles of basic and applied physics.
    Subject knowledge to pursue higher studies in the advanced physics areas, such as, High Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Quantum Information Processing, Nanotechnology, Plasma Technology, Nonlinear Optics, Fibre Optics, etc.
    Knowledge of fabrication and characterization of devices, such as, solar cells, gas sensor, energy storage, magnetic data storage, etc.
    Skills in certain experimental techniques for characterization of materials for their structural, morphological, surface topology, electrical, magnetic, dielectric and optical properties.
    Knowledge and skills to use various vacuum based techniques for development of thin film-based materials, structures, and plasma devices and systems.
    Technical knowledge and skills to understand and appreciate interdisciplinary research topics.
    Skills in computational physics for wide range of applications ranging from the visualization of physical theories and process, design of functional materials, simulation and modelling of optical processes, etc.
    Written and Oral technical communication skills. 


Duration: 2 years

Proposed Intake: 38 (including EWS)

Eligibility: JAM (Physics) qualified candidates will be considered as per the existing norms of M.Sc. (Physics) program. For details click here.
2. MSc (Physics)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) Dual Degree Program - 4 years


Hello,

One moment, everything feels fine. Next, your heart is racing, your chest tightens, and a wave of fear takes over. Panic attacks can feel unpredictable and overwhelming, but they are manageable. With the right techniques, you can regain a sense of control and navigate these moments with confidence.

In this edition, we’re diving into practical, science-backed strategies to help you manage a panic attack in real-time. From breathing exercises that calm your nervous system to grounding techniques that bring you back to the present, these tools can make a real difference.

The more prepared you are, the more power you have over them. Let’s explore how you can take back control—one step at a time.

Calm Your Mind with Deep Breathing

During a panic attack, hyperventilation can make symptoms worse. Deep breathing helps slow your heart rate and restore a sense of control. Try this:

4-4-4 Breathing – Inhale through your nose for 4 seconds, hold for 4, and exhale through your mouth for 4. Repeat.

Diaphragmatic Breathing – Place a hand on your belly, breathe deeply, and feel it rise. This reduces anxiety and increases focus.

A few deep breaths can shift your entire state of mind. Try it now.

Recognize the Signs, Regain Control

Panic attacks feel overwhelming, but they don’t define you. The moment you recognize what’s happening, you’re already one step closer to calming down.

Remind Yourself: “This is temporary. I’ve been through this before, and I can handle it.”

Refocus Your Mind: Shift your attention from fear to something real—your breath, the ground beneath you, or a familiar sound.

You’ve faced tough moments before, and you’ve overcome those. This is no different.

Focus on one object
 

Research says that concentrating on one physical object helps reduce the impact of distressing thoughts, feelings, or memories by narrowing attention to a single stimulus.

Observe Every Detail – Notice its color, texture, shape, and movement. Describe it to yourself: “The clock hand moves in sharp ticks, the frame is slightly tilted.”

Students attend teaching sessions conducted by faculty across all departments.
Scholars participate in research seminars and colloquia organised by their supervisors.

Teaching outcomes are assessed through the academic performance of students each semester.
Research outcomes are measured through the publications and theses produced by scholars.

The goal of teaching is to develop competent engineers and scientists from students.
The goal of research is to produce original knowledge through the work of scholars and fellows.

A teaching assistant supports faculty in delivering coursework to students.
A research assistant supports faculty in executing funded projects alongside fellow scholars.
 

Engage Your Senses – Touch it if possible, notice how it feels, and stay present with it.

Shifting focus from fear to something tangible can help panic fade.

Reach Out—You Don’t Have to Face It Alone

Panic attacks can feel isolating, but letting someone know what’s happening can help you. A simple “I’m feeling overwhelmed” to a friend, colleague, or even a kind stranger can make a difference.

Let Trusted People Know in Advance – If you’re prone to panic attacks, tell close friends or colleagues so they can support you when needed. Many smartphones have built-in emergency SOS options that can alert a chosen contact with your location.

Ask for Help in the Moment – If in public, find a quiet space with someone who can offer reassurance.

Support is closer than you think. If panic attacks feel overwhelming, consider seeking professional guidance—because you don’t have to navigate this alone.

Panic attacks may feel overwhelming, but they are temporary—and you equip yourself with tools and techniques. With practice and the right strategies, you can regain control and navigate these moments with confidence.

Mayank Vatsa is a Professor at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur, a Fellow of IEEE and IAPR, and a member of the National Academy of AI (USA). His research focuses on Artificial Intelligence, with an emphasis on Generative AI, Responsible AI, computer vision, and biometrics. He is a recipient of India's prestigious Swarnajayanti Fellowship and the IEEE Meritorious Service Award (2023). He serves as Co-Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE Transactions on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science, a journal he led the efforts to establish during his tenure as Vice President of the IEEE Biometrics Council. He has also held senior roles at premier conferences like AAAI, CVPR, ICCV, IJCB, and FG. Dr. Vatsa has contributed in several of India's key technology initiatives, contributing to UIDAI (Aadhaar) standards, DigiYatra, the NITI Aayog 'Responsible AI for All' policy, national biometric standards, and the formation of the Technology Innovation Hub at IIT Jodhpur.

D​r. Singh is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. She earned her Ph.D. in Computer Science from West Virginia University, USA. She is a globally recognized leader in artificial intelligence and machine learning, with a focus on pattern recognition, biometrics, medical image analysis, and Responsible AI. Her contributions to the field have been recognized with the highest distinctions, including being named a Fellow of the IEEE, IAPR, and Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE). She is also an ACM Distinguished Member and a member of the National Academy of AI (USA). A prolific researcher, Prof. Singh has authored over 400 publications in top-tier venues, which have garnered more than 16,200 citations (h index: 71). Her research program has attracted external grants exceeding Rs. 56 crores. She holds editorial leadership roles, serving as the Founding Co-Editor-in-Chief of ACM AI Letters and the Associate Editor-in-Chief of the prestigious Pattern Recognition Journal. Prof. Singh's work has demonstrated profound real-world impact. Her face recognition technology was instrumental in the challenging task of identifying victims of the Balasore train accident, while her deepfake detection systems were deployed to ​p​revent the​ spread of misinformation ​i​n India's 2024 general elections. Her contributions have been honored with numerous awards, including the Nasscom AI Gamechangers Award and the Facebook Award for Ethics in AI. She has supervised 14 Ph.D. students to graduation (14 ongoing PhDs) and guided over 200 M.Tech and B.Tech students. She has a strong record of service to the academic community, notably serving as the Program Committee Chair for CVPR 2022, becoming the first researcher from India to hold this position in the conference's 40-year history. She regularly serves in leadership roles for premier conferences such as ICCV, ECCV, AAAI, and major biometrics venues.

Angshuman Paul is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science & Engineering at IIT Jodhpur. His research primarily focuses on the development of deep learning techniques for the synthesis and analysis of medical images, aiming to advance affordable healthcare solutions. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, he served as a postdoctoral fellow at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), USA.

Since March 2025, Dr Jain is an assistant professor at the CSE department of IIT Jodhpur. In June 2025, Dr Jain, recevied DST INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship Grant for five years. Before joining academics, he was in industrial research at Hitachi Rail, Berlin for little over two years. There Dr Jain led R&D projects dealing with digitalization in the railway domain, including a patent in Digital Twin. For his PhD at Technical University Berlin, he worked on Deep Learning Mesh Parameterization of 3D Shapes for various applications. During his PhD, he developed 3D data registration softwares for medical instrument manufacturing companies. His focus areas include 3D Computer Vision, Edge AI, VR/AR Visualization amongst others.

Anand Mishra serves as a faculty member in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering. He leads the Vision, Language, and Learning Group (VL2G) at IIT Jodhpur, which focuses on problems at the intersection of vision and language. Specifically, the group is focusing on video understanding, efficient vision and language models and multilinguality. Anand has made significant contributions to the field through influential resources and systems, including the IIIT-5K and OCR-VQA datasets, as well as IndicPhotoOCR, an open-source OCR system for Indian language text in natural images. His research group has received support through various industry and government of India grants, including Microsoft Academic Partnership Grant (2021 and 2023), MeitY Grant on National Language Translation Mission, a research grant from HealthcareNLP, a Gift Grant from Accenture, and a Start-up Research Grant from SERB, Govt. of India. Anand is an active reviewer for top-tier computer vision, language and AI venues, and his reviewing contributions have been recognized with Outstanding Reviewer Awards at ICCV 2021 and CVPR 2023. He served as Program Co-Chair for ICVGIP 2025 and is currently serving as an Area Chair for CVPR 2026 and ECCV 2026.

Dr. Banerjee is curently working as an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of IIT Jodhpur. His research interests are broadly in the areas of high performance computing, big data analytics, accelerated computing, and computer architectures. Previously he was a post-doctoral researcher at the Network Based Computing Laboratory of The Ohio State University where he worked under the mentorship of Prof. Dhabaleswar K. Panda. Before that, he completed my Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) from International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad in 2014 where he worked under the guidance of Dr. Kishore Kothapalli. He was a part of the Center for Security, Theory, and Algorithmic Research (CSTAR) laboratory. His PhD research was broadly in High Performance Computing where he worked towards developing novel algorithms and implementations for heterogeneous computing platforms that could utilise multiple multi-core and many-core processors at the same time leading to better performance and higher system efficiency.

Dr. Debasis Das is currently working as an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering and Associate Faculty at the School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AIDE), as well as Coordinator of IoT and Applications (Inter-disciplinary Research Platform (IDRP) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. His research interests include Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs), Blockchain, the Internet of Things (IoT), Machine Learning (ML), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Quantum Technology. Dr. Das published 170 research papers in top international journals( Like IEEE Transactions, ACM Transactions, etc) and top B/A/A* Conferences. Dr. Das has 23 sponsored projects and 2 consultancy projects to his credit. He has been awarded the Early Career Research (ECR) Award, BRICS Young Scientist Award, Young Researcher Award-2024, DST-NSF Project Award 2025, NSTC Research Project Award 2025 from Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science & Technology (DST), MoE, NSF, and NSTC, respectively. He has many research collaborations with premier institutions in India and different universities across the globe. He has been engaged in different academic activities inside and outside the Institute. He has supervised 10 Ph.D. students, and 10 are currently pursuing their theses. He has also supervised more than 50 M.E./M.Tech. thesis. He is a senior member of IEEE and VTS and a professional member of ACM.

Prof. Rajpurohit is a dynamic academician and researcher adept at Renewable Energy and Power Electronics Application to Power Systems. Prof. Rajpurohit has expertise in the area of Power Electronics application to Power Systems, Future Electricity Networks, Grid Integration of Renewable Energy, and Power quality. Prof. Rajpurohit has published papers in reputed journals and conferences. He has conducted many short-term courses and workshops. He has both academic and industrial experiences with leadership quality thus, can manage academic as well as project-related activities. Prof. Rajpurohit has more than 15 years of involvement with the energy sector in various capacities: graduate-level teaching in energy, research, and industrial experience.

Deepak Fulwani received the Ph.D. degree in control systems from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Bombay, Mumbai, India, in 2009. He was an assistant professor at IIT Guwahati, Guwahati, India, and served as a visiting faculty at IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India. He is currently a professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India. He has authored or coauthored several articles in reputed international journals and conferences. His current research interests are power electronics, microgrids, and control systems. Prof. Fulwani was a guest associate editor for a special issue on structured DC microgrids for the IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics in 2017. He was an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications from 2019 to 2022. He is currently an Editorial Board Member of Nature Scientific Reports and Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics since June 2024. He was the recipient of the Excellence Award for his Ph.D. thesis work in the IDP program in Systems and Control in the 48th Convocation of IIT Bombay. He was also awreded Teaching Excellence Award (for class size 30 to 60) by IIT Jodhpur in 2020

Mahesh Kumar. He has received INSA Medal for Young Scientists-2014 by Indian National Science Academy, the MRSI Medal-2016 by Materials Research Society of India, DAE-Young Achiever Award-2016 during Solid State Physics Symposium, Research Excellence Award 2020 by IIT Jodhpur and Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel Research Prize by The Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, Germany. He is recipient of the NAWA ULAM-2024 fellowship by Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange, Brain Pool Program-2022 by Korean National Research Foundation, Fulbright-Nehru Academic and Professional Excellence Fellowships-2021; The Royal Society International Exchange Award-2021; JSPS Invitation Fellowship-2021, PIFI Visiting Scientist fellowship-2021 by Chinese Academy of Science; Duo-India Professor Fellowship-2020, Bhaskara Advanced Solar Energy Fellowship-2018 and INSA-DFG International Bilateral Exchange Award-2015. Recently INAE awarded him Abdul Kalam Technology Innovation National Fellowship 2022. He is also Editorial Board member of Nanotechnology, IEEE Sensors Journal, Bulletin of Materials Science and Nano Express. He is also Fellow of Royal Society of Chemistry and Institute of Physics. He is founding Member and served as Chair of Indian National Young Academy of Sciences. He published more than 200 research articles. His research interests are focused on 2D materials, Nanomaterials, Sensors, Semiconductor materials and devices.

Aashish Mathur (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree (Hons.) in electronics and instrumentation engineering from the Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) Pilani, Pilani, India, in 2011, the M.Tech. degree in telecommunication technology and management from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi, New Delhi, India, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree in power line communications from the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi, in 2016.

He was a Software Engineer with Intel Technology India Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru, India, briefly before joining IIT Delhi for his Ph.D. in 2013. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India. He has also worked as an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, BITS

Pilani and the Department of Electronics Engineering, IIT (BHU) Varanasi, Varanasi, India. He was engaged as a Visiting Faculty with the Indian Institute of Information Technology Kota, Kota, India, for the second semester, from 2018 to 2019. He served as an Adjunct Faculty (part-time) with IIT Delhi from 2019 to 2022 and 2022-2025. His research interests include visible light communications, free-space optical communications, power line communications, and physical layer security.

Dr. Mathur received the Best Student Paper Award for his co-authored paper in 2017 Conference on Decision and Game Theory for Security (GameSec 2017), Vienna, Austria. He was awarded the Early Career Research Award by the Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India, in 2019. He was awarded the Teaching Excellence Award at IIT Jodhpur in 2019. He was recognized as an Exemplary Reviewer 2021 for IEEE Transactions on Communications and IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society for 2024. He is serving as an Associate Editor of IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society.

Amit Bhardwaj received his PhD degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Bombay in June 2016. From June 2016 to January 2017, he was a research associate at IIT Bombay, Mumbai. From February 2017- December 2017, he was an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral fellow at the Chair of Media Technology, Technical University of Munich, Germany. After that, he joined the Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea as a postdoctoral researcher. Currently, he is working as an associate professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering, at IIT Jodhpur. He has research experience in the area of virtual reality and multi-sensory human perception.

He has published his research work in top journals and conferences in the area of haptics and robotics. He has also published a book in the area of perception.

The vision of the Department is to develop a world class teaching and research atmosphere by excelling in
fundamental knowledge and applications of Electrical Engineering through curricular and co-curricular
activities. In line with this vision, the department offers an undergraduate program to attract highly motivated
students who are interested in cutting-edge technologies in the broad discipline of electrical engineering, and
wish for a flexible program to consider a variety of career paths through capability-linked specializations of their
choice.

The program provides strong fundamentals in mathematics and science which develop analytical thinking and
form the basis of the diverse tool set used by electrical engineers to innovate, design and develop the technology
of the future. The engineering design component is integrated throughout the curriculum, motivating and
familiarizing students with the real-world engineering challenges and equipping them with the essential technical
skills for problem solving. The early strong theoretical foundations and hand-on exposure are supplemented by
the core electrical engineering concepts ranging from circuit analysis and design, computing, control,
communication, signal processing, and power engineering. Additional problem-solving skills and practical
experience are developed through design projects and laboratory experiments.

The curriculum offers flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice. The
department specializations are designed to enable students to lead technological innovations addressing the
emerging industrial and societal challenges in various domains of electrical engineering. The EE students can opt
for any one of the departmental specializations in Cyber Physical Systems, Intelligent Communication and Networking,

Communication Engineering, VLSI Systems, Visual Computing, Socio-Digital Reality, Nano and Flexible Electronics,

Smart Grid, and Artificial Intelligence of Things. The in-depth understanding and technical skills acquired through
these specializations will enable graduates to play a vital role in advancement of technologies such as 5G/6G
communications, smart cities, smart healthcare, and Industry 4.0.

Another distinct feature of the curriculum is provision for minors in Entrepreneurship or Management or
interdisciplinary specializations in Smart Healthcare, Artificial Intelligence, and Robotics and Mobility Systems that
allow students to pursue diverse career goals. Students will also have an opportunity to opt for a B. Tech. -

Master’s dual degree in their chosen specialization or minor area. The curriculum also offers numerous options
that enable students to gain industrial experience through collaborative industrial projects at industries and
entrepreneurship experience at the Institute's incubation centre.

4. Learning Outcomes

The b.tech graduates of EE UG program will be able:

1. To acquire knowledge of electrical engineering principles along with the required understanding of
computing, engineering fundamentals, mathematics, and science.

2. To apply the concepts of mathematics, sciences and engineering (including computing science) to analyze and
design complex electrical and electronic circuits and systems containing hardware and software modules.

3. To gain in-depth understanding of concepts of Signals, Devices, Circuits, Systems, Machine Learning,
Programming, Control, Communications, Hardware Design and related interdisciplinary topics.

4. To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, electrical engineering design and computing
tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory
exercises and design projects.

5. To perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.

6. To adapt to work in multidisciplinary environment.

7. To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.

8. To develop technical presentation skills and communicate effectively.

9. To engage in independent learning in the context of technological advancements.

10. To conduct develop attitude for product design and entrepreneurial activities.

b.tech ug students are eligible in this program.

2. Objectives of the program

The program aims at imparting theoretical foundations and practical skills of electrical engineering discipline. It
prepares graduates for three potential career paths:

1. An industrial path to take up the role of a technical leader or a manager through life-long learning.

2. An entrepreneurial path to apply the acquired knowledge to develop new products and initiate Deep Tech

Start-up Company.

3. An academic path to enter a top-tier graduate program to conduct cutting-edge research with broad
applications, and eventually to pursue a research or academic profession.

3. Expected Graduate Attributes

Graduates of the UG program in EE are expected to have following attributes:

1. Strong understanding of fundamentals of mathematics, science and engineering with emphasis on electrical
technologies for Communication, Signal Processing, Devices & Circuits, Computing Systems, Control

Engineering, and Power Engineering

2. Ability to apply technical skills to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems encountered in modern
electrical engineering practices.

3. Ability to model, analyze, design and experimentally evaluate electrical components or systems that achieve
desired technical specifications, subject to certain resource constraints.

2

4. Ability to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements and assume leadership roles
within academic, industrial, or entrepreneurial environments in the broad context of electrical engineering.

5. Have established the foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse
disciplines through minor/ graduate-level studies and the process of life-long learning.

6. Ability to recognize and practice professional ethics in working environment.

7. Ability to acquire new knowledge and integrate it in the existing paradigm so as to create new innovative
electrical systems for the current and future usage and apply it as needed.

4. Learning Outcomes

The graduates of EE UG program will be able:

1. To acquire knowledge of electrical engineering principles along with the required understanding of
computing, engineering fundamentals, mathematics, and science.

2. To apply the concepts of mathematics, sciences and engineering (including computing science) to analyze and
design complex electrical and electronic circuits and systems containing hardware and software modules.

3. To gain in-depth understanding of concepts of Signals, Devices, Circuits, Systems, Machine Learning,

Programming, Control, Communications, Hardware Design and related interdisciplinary topics.

4. To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, electrical engineering design and computing
tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory
exercises and design projects.

5. To perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.

6. To adapt to work in multidisciplinary environment.

7. To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.

8. To develop technical presentation skills and communicate effectively.

9. To engage in independent learning in the context of technological advancements.

10. To conduct develop attitude for product design and entrepreneurial activities.

5. New skill sets targeted

EE students explore subjects critical to advancement in today’s needs — from circuit design and electronics to
computing, control and communication, and machine learning. The acquired knowledge will be helpful in future
technologies including:

1. 5G and Beyond Communications

2. Cyber Physical Systems

3. Nano-electronics and Quantum Devices

4. Smart Grid

3

6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses

Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses

Area Category Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE)

Communi
cation

Core

Random Variables, Stochastic Processes,

Stationarity, Ergodicity, Discrete and

Continuous Random Processes

Probability, Statistics and

Stochastic Processes (IE, MA)

Signal and System Classification, LTI

Systems Properties and Response, Fourier,

Laplace and z-Transform, Sampling

Signals and Systems (IE, EE)

EM Wave Propagation, Transmission Lines,

Waveguides and Antennas

Engineering Electromagnetics
(PC)

Modelling of Noise and Channels, Noise
through LTI Systems, Modulation, Digital

Baseband and Passband Transmissions,

Communication Systems (PC)

Techniques

OSI Architecture, Source Coding, Error
correction techniques, Queuing Theory,

Switching Techniques, Controlled and

Random Access, Routing, End-to-End

Reliability

Data Communication Networks
(PC)

Quantization, Discrete Fourier Transform,

Fast Fourier Transform, Circular

Convolution, Multirate Signal Processing

Digital Signal Processing (PC)

Source Coding, Channel Coding, Channel

Capacity Theorem, AWGN Channel

Capacity, Multiuser Channel Capacity

Information Theory and Coding
(PE)

Systems 5G and beyond Communications

Cellular Communication

Networks (PE)

Spread Spectrum

Communications (PE)

Satellite Communications (PE)

Microwave Engineering (PE)

Computer Networks (PE)

Optical Communication

Systems (PE)

4

EE UG – Communications Concentration Roadmap

Area Category Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE)

Signal

Processing

Core

Probability, Random Variables,

Concentration bounds, Linear Prediction,

Covariance Matrix, Random Processes,

Probability, Statistics and

Stochastic Processes (IE,

MA)

Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI

Systems, Sampling and Quantization

Signals and Systems (IE,

EE)

Basics of Complexity Analysis, Data

Structures, Sorting, Searching, Shortest

Paths.

Data Structures and

Algorithms (PC)

Techniques

Sampling and Reconstruction, Fourier

Analysis (CTFT, DTFT), Discrete Fourier

Transform, Quantization Error Analysis,

Finite Length Effects, FIR and IIR Filter

Design and Implementation, Multi-rate

Systems

Digital Signal processing
(PC)

Shannon’s lossless source coding theorem
and rate-distortion theory

Information Theory and

Coding (PE)

Systems Signal Processing and Interpretation

Signal Compression (PE)

Speech Processing (PE)

System Identification (PE)

Digital Image Processing
(PE)

5

EE UG – Signal Processing Concentration Roadmap

Area Category Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE)

Control

Engineering

Core

Signals Through LTI Systems

Fourier, Laplace and z-Transform

Systems Modelling in Time and

Frequency Domain

Signals and Systems
(IE),

Circuit Theory (PC)

Classical Control Theory, Characteristics of

Feedback Systems, State-Space Analysis,

Controller and Observer Design, Compensation

Techniques

Control System (PC)

Techniques

Vector spaces and Linear operators, State

Feedback for MIMO and SISO systems,

Discrete time system, Linear system stability,

Controllability, observability, reachability and
stabilizability, Reduced order observer
design, Separation principle

Modern Control (PE)

Systems Cyber-Physical Systems

Nonlinear and

Adaptive Control (PE)

Robust and Optimal

Control (PE)

Foundations of CyberPhysical Systems (PE)

Introduction to

Robotics (PE)

6

EE UG – Control Engineering Concentration Roadmap

Area Category Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE)

Devices
and

Circuits

Core

Quantum Mechanical Tunneling

Bulk vs Quantum Properties

Crystals and Energy Bands

Foundations of Quantum

Information Processing (IE,

PH)

Magnetic Materials Material Science and

Engineering (IE)

Heat Transfer Thermodynamics (IE, ME)

Fourier Analysis Signals and Systems (IE, EE)

Basic Circuit Theory Circuit Theory (PC)

Transmission Lines and Guiding Structures Engineering

Electromagnetics (PC)

Techniques

Energy Band Formation, Drift and Diffusion,

Device Physics, MOS Capacitors and

Transistors, High Power Devices,

Unconventional Devices

Physical Electronics (PC)

Review of MOSFETs, Single Stage and

Differential Amplifiers , Cascade and Cascode

Amplifiers, Operational Amplifiers and

Feedback, Small Signal and Frequency Response

Analog Circuits (PC)

ASIC Design Flow, CMOS Implementation of

Gates, Combinational and Sequential Circuits,

VLSI Design (PE)

7

Static Timing Analysis, Floor planning and

Routing, Packaging

Systems Nano-electronics and Integrated Circuits

Integrated Circuit

Technology (PE)

Sensors and Actuators (PE)

CAD for VLSI(PE)

Physics and Modeling of

MOS Transistor (PE)

EE UG – Devices and Circuits Concentration Roadmap

Area Category Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE)

Computing

Systems

Core

Probability, Random Variables,

Concentration bounds, Linear

Prediction, Covariance Matrix,

Probability, Statistics and

Stochastic Processes (IE, MA)

Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI

Systems, Sampling and Quantization Signals and Systems (IE, EE)

Design of Digital Circuits

Implementation using Verilog/HDL

Digital Design (PC)

Basics of Complexity Analysis, Data

Structures, Sorting, Searching, Shortest

Paths

Data Structure and Algorithms
(PC)

Learning methods Pattern Recognition and

Machine Learning (IE)

Techniques Pipelined Processing, Memory

Organization, Interfacing

Computer Architecture (PC)

8

Sampling Theory and Signal

Reconstruction, Fast Fourier Transform,

Digital Filters

Digital Signal Processing (PC)

Microprocessors and Microcontrollers,

Memory Interfacing, Arm Mbed

Embedded Systems (PC)

Interfacing with GPIOs, Interfacing DC

Motor, Keyboard Interfacing, Use of

Timers to produce delay,

Implementation of Digital Filters

Digital Systems Lab (PC)

Systems

Embedded Computing and SoC

High Level Synthesis (PE, CS)

Real-Time Systems (PE)

Reconfigurable Computing
(PE)

Artificial Intelligence(PE, AI)

Pervasive and Mobile

Computing (PE, CS)

EE UG – Computing Systems Concentration Roadmap

Area Category Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE)

Power

Engineering Core

Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI

Systems, Sampling and Quantization

Signals and Systems (IE)

Network theorems, Step and impulse
response, Two-port network analysis,

Three phase circuits

Circuit Theory (PC)

Maxwell’s equations, Wave propagation Engineering Electromagnetics
(PC)

Thyristor, IGBT Physical Electronics (PC)

9

Techniques

Transformers, DC machines, Induction
machines, Synchronous machines

Control of machines using converters

Electrical Machines (PC)

Electrical Machines Lab (PC)

Transmission line modelling and
performance, Per-unit representation of
power system, Underground cables,

Overhead line insulators, Power electronic
converter based, compensation, Integration
of renewable energy sources, Power system
monitoring and protection

Power Engineering (PC)

Systems Smart Grid

Measurement and

Instrumentation (PE)

Power System Analysis and

Stability (PE)

Power System Operation and

Control (PE)

Power Electronics (PE)

Industrial Drives (PE)

EE UG – Power Engineering Concentration Roadmap

10

7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes

Table 2.ProposedCourse Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes

S.N. Course Type Course Category Regular B.Tech.

Credit Total

1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69

Science (IS) 16

Humanities (IH) 12

2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7

3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 52 71

Programme Electives (PE) 16

B.Tech. Project (PP) 3

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10

5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0

Total Graded 150

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15

Engineering (NE) 3

Design/Practical Experience (ND) 6

Total Graded + Non-Graded 165

11

8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes

Table 4.Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up to 6XXX Level)

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits

Contact Hours (TC=TH/3)
(CH)

Beyond Contact

Hours (BCH)

Total Hours
(TH)

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1

1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5
#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.

12

9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses

Table 5. Programme Compulsory Courses

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit

1 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4

2 Circuit Theory 3-0-0 3 3

3 Engineering Electromagnetics 3-0-0 3 3

4 Physical Electronics 3-0-0 3 3

5 Digital Design 2-0-2 4 3

6 Analog Circuits 3-0-3 6 4.5

7 Electrical Machines 3-0-0 3 3

8 Communication Systems 3-0-0 3 3

9 Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 3

10 Control Systems 3-0-3 6 4.5

11 Digital Signal Processing 2-0-0 3 2

12 Data Communication Networks 3-0-0 3 3

13 Power Engineering 3-0-3 6 4.5

14 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3 3

15 Digital Systems Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5

16 Electrical Machines Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5

17 Communication Systems Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5

Total 52

13

10. ScanArea-wise Programme Elective Courses

Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses

S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P Credit

1 Communication

Information Theory and Coding (300)

Computer Networks ( CS)

Microwave Engineering (400)

Cellular Communication Networks(400)

Satellite Communications (400)

Spread Spectrum Communications(400)

Optical Communication Systems (400)

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

2 Signal Processing

Digital Image Processing (400)

Speech Processing (400)

Signal Compression (400)

System Identification (400)

2-0-0

2-0-0

2-0-0

2-0-0

2

2

2

2

3

Control

Engineering

Modern Control (300)

Nonlinear and Adaptive Control (400)

Robust and Optimal Control (400)

Foundations of Cyber Physical Systems (400)

Introduction to Robotics ( IDRP)

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3

3

3

3

3

4

Devices and

Circuits

VLSI Design (300)

Biosensors (300)

Integrated Circuit Technology (700)

Sensors and Actuators (400)

CAD for VLSI (700)

Physics and Modeling of MOS Transistor (400)

3-0-0

3-0-2

3-0-0

3-0-0

2-0-2

3-0-0


Computing

Systems

Deep Learning ( AI)

High Level Synthesis ( CS)

Real-Time Systems (400)

Reconfigurable Computing (400)

Pervasive and Mobile Computing (CS)

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0


Power

Engineering

Measurement and Instrumentation (300)

Power System Analysis and Stability (400)

Power System Operation and Control (400)

Power Electronics (400)

Industrial Drives (400)

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0


Mini-Project(0-0-6)

Program elective component for 8th semester

Design/Practical Experience (ND)

Options: Three Summer Design Projects (0-0-4) for 2 Credits each or in regular semesters.

14

11. Specialization to be offered by the department

Table 7. Specialization and courses

S. No. Name of

Specialization

Introduction

1

Cyber Physical

System

In today's world, there is a global interest to study systems that can interact with
each other and the surrounding with cooperative objectives, because of the
introduction of new and cheap computational and communication resources.

Such systems are usually referred to as cyber-physical systems (CPS). Almost,
everything around us constitutes a cyber-physical system. For instance, traffic
networks, a swarm of unmanned vehicles, smart power distribution networks,
etc., are some of the recent technological movements towards automation.

The philosophy of the cyber-physical systems vertical is to familiarize students
with the basic building blocks for the analysis and synthesis of such systems,
along with hands-on experiments. The theme of this vertical span through the
various core subjects ranging from design, control, and computing to safety and
security of cyber-physical systems.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

Introduction to Cyber physical

Systems 3-0-0/ Foundation of Cyber

Physical Systems* 3-0-0

Security in Cyber Physical Systems 2-

0-0

Advanced Control System 3-0-0

Robust and optimal control 3-0-0

Nonlinear and Adaptive control 3-0-0

Modern Control 3-0-0

Networked Dynamical Systems and

Control 3-0-0

Introduction to robotics 3-0-0

Autonomous Systems 3-0-0

Real-Time Systems 3-0-0

Reconfigurable Computing 3-0-0

Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0

Measurement and Instrumentation 3-

0-0

Computer Networks 3-0-3

System Identification 3-0-0

Computer Vision 3-0-0

Edge & Fog Computing 3-0-0

Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks
(VANETs) 3-0-0

Introduction to Smart Grid 3-0-0

Smart Manufacturing 1-0-2

Resource Constrained AI 3-0-0

Industry 4.0: Applications in

Manufacturing Systems1-0-0

Optimization 1-0-0

Specialization Project 0-0-12
*If a student does Foundation of CPS, she/he will be exempted from Introduction to CPS course.

15

S. No. Name of

Specialization

Introduction

2

Communication

Engineering

The fast development of economy and society requires modern and highperformance communications systems that can reliably communicate the
massive amount of data originating from various sources including Internet of

Things, while still offering acceptable levels of energy consumption, equipment
cost and network deployment and operation cost. To achieve these objective
communication engineers require a deep mathematical understanding of the
trade-offs involved in efficient reliable communication design and circuits and
systems for future communication systems.

The core component of the Communication Engineering specialization enables
students to face these challenges by focusing on topics involving
communication theory, wireless networking and protocol design, security
architectures, and system performance analysis. The elective bouquet provides
students an opportunity to either gain required depth for graduate level
academic programs of their choice or sufficient breadth to expose them to
defining technology for future generation communication systems including
optical and millimeter wave technologies.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

Optical Communication

Systems(3-0-0)

Wireless Communications
(3-0-0)

Digital Communications:

Hands-on (1-0-2)

Cellular Communication Networks 3-0-0

MIMO Wireless Communications 3-0-0

UAV Assisted Wireless Networks 3-0-0

Spread Spectrum Communications 3-0-0

Network Security 3-0-0

Statistical Decision Theory 2-0-0

Machine Learning for Communications 3-0-0

Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0

Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0

Adaptive Signal Processing 3-0-0

Quantum Communications 3-0-0

Optical Techniques for Communications 2-0-2

Optical Signal Processing 3-0-0

Optical Fiber Communications 3-0-0

Free Space Optical Communication 3-0-0

Optical Networks 3-0-0

Antenna Engineering 3-0-0

RF Integrated Circuits 3-0-0

Millimeter Wave Technology 3-0-0

RF System Design for Communications 3-0-0

Radar Engineering 3-0-0

Selected Topics in Communication I 1-0-0

Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0

Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0

Specialization Project 0-0-6

3

Intelligent

Communication
and Networking
(EE, AI and CS)

The development of communications has vastly relied on theories and models,
from information theory to channel modelling. These traditional approaches are
showing serious limitations, especially in view of the increased complexity of
communication networks. The advent of 5G is introducing new challenges for
mobile communications service providers, and integrating artificial
intelligence/machine learning techniques into networks is one way the industry
is addressing these complexities. Advances in artificial intelligence, particularly
taking advantage of rapidly increasing network and user behavior data,
indicates a new technological frontier of communications and networking, not

16
only in new methodology in systems and network design, but also in new
network architecture accommodating machine learning for broader and
efficient services.

The main objective of specialization in Intelligent Communication and

Networking is to introduce students to new trends, approaches, methods,
systems, as well as communication network architectures and application of
artificial intelligence and machine learning to address communication network
management issues.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

Design and Analysis of

Communication Networks (3-0-2)

Intelligent Radio Networks (3-0-2)

Computer Networks

Computation Oriented Communications

Machine Learning for Communications

Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing

Real-Time Communications

Delay Tolerant Networks

Cognitive Internet of Vehicles

Hardware-Aware Communications

Selected Topics in Communication I

Selected Topics in Communication II

Selected Topics in Communication III

Specialization Project 0-0-12

4

Visual

Computing
(EE, CS, ME and

AI)

This specialization is designed to attract highly motivated students who are
interested in the signal processing domain with a focus on visual computing.

Current and future industry trends indicate increased involvement of visual
computing for various automation processes, healthcare, and entertainment.

The designed curriculum aims to provide education with excellence in some of
the emerging areas which fall under the broad umbrella of visual computing.

The curriculum is designed to enable students in choosing a variety of career
paths such as intelligent visual computing, industry, and entrepreneurship.

Graduates with specialization in visual computing are expected to have the
attributes such as strong understanding of fundamentals of Mathematics, Signal

Processing, Speech Understanding, Computer Vision, Computer Graphics,

Haptics, Multimedia Processing, and AR/VR.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

Computer Graphics (3-0-0)

Computer Vision (3-0-0)

Visual Computing Lab (0-0-4)

Computational Imaging

Computational Photography

Video Processing and Analysis

Bio-imaging

Medical Image Analysis

Image Synthesis

Animations

Digital Image Processing

Selected Topic: Advancements in

Computer Vision

Selected Topics in Computer Vision

Visual Perception

Real-Time Vision Architectures

Introduction to AR and VR

Introduction to Haptics

Advance Machine Learning

Scalable Machine Learning

17

Compressive Sensing

3D Shape Analysis

Image and Video Forensics

Specialization Project 0-0-6

5

Socio-Digital

Reality
(EE, CS and AI)

The ever growing presence of social media and the need for more realistic ways
of interacting via the digital world is fuelling novel and exciting industry
innovations. Many industrial players (Google, Facebook, Microsoft etc.) have
now dedicated centres and futuristic plans in the said area. Hence, this
specialization seeks to provide students with fundamental knowledge that will
enable them to design and innovate in several related areas within the broad
theme of socio-digital reality.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

Social Network (3-0-0),

Introduction to AR-VR (3-0-0)

Multimodal interface (0-0-4)

Introduction to Haptics,

Design Process,

Speech Understanding,

Computer Graphics,

Human Computer Interface,

Natural Language Understanding,

Computer Vision,

Image and Video Forensics

Specialization Project 0-0-6

6

Nano and

Flexible

Electronics

Semiconductor devices have been at the core for advancement of the current IC
industry. Till now, the technology has followed Moore’s law for scaling towards
the sub-10 nm era. To accomplish that, various new materials and device
structures have found a place in current generation chips. Moreover, various
issues related to technology scaling such as quantum mechanical effects have
found importance in R&D for new generation devices. In addition, new nonvolatile memory technologies have been explored for faster and denser
alternatives to conventional Random Access Memories. Moreover, technologies
such as Flexible Electronics have emerged as a potential candidate for large area
and low cost options for hybrid integration of flexible components.

To train the students in this specialization and cover the essential fundamentals,
three core components have been chosen: Quantum Nano-electronics, Flexible
and Printed electronics, & Emerging Devices including alternate transistor
structures and new non-volatile memory devices. These will provide
fundamental understanding of new generation nanoelectronics, related
processing, and characterization. The electives will help in shaping the ability of
the students to think creatively, provide an in depth cognition and expose them
to deliver towards direct applications and also to undertake industry relevant
research. A combination of nano and flexible electronics will prepare students
for new age challenges such as cost, power, and wider suitability for various
applications.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

Introduction to Spintronics (3-0-0)

Flexible and Printed Electronics (3-0-0)

Advanced Compact Modeling (2-0-0)

Nano Sensors

Quantum Nano-Electronics

Non-Volatile Memory Technologies

18

Semiconductor Optoelectronics

Organic Optoelectronics

Specialization Project 0-0-12

7

Artificial Intelligence of

Things (AIoT)
(EE, CS and AI)

Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) is a combination of artificial intelligence
(AI) technologies with the internet of things (IoT) infrastructure to achieve more
efficient IoT operations by enhancing data management and analytics. This is
transformational and mutually beneficial for both technologies as AI improves
data analytics and decision making capabilities through machine learning and

IoT adds value through better connectivity, signalling and data exchange.

The specialization in AIoT is designed to impart knowledge in a wide variety of
fields such as IoT, communications, VLSI, computing, AI and ML. Design of IoT
system architecture, its components and applications along with machine
learning and AI algorithms is covered through courses such as Introduction to

IoT and Artificial Intelligence. Industry relevant circuit design practices are
included in courses such as Analog and Interfacing Circuits and Digital and SoC

Design. The program also features hands-on implementation of IoT systems
through labs and tutorials.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

Artificial Intelligence / Advanced

Machine Learning (3-0-0)

Introduction to IoT (1-0-0)

Digital and SoC Design (3-0-0)

SIoT lab (0-0-2)

Embedded Systems

Microsystems Fabrication Technology

Sensors and Measurements

Deep Learning

Advanced Machine Learning

Advanced Artificial Intelligence

Edge and Fog Computing

Neuromorphic Computing and Design

Analog and Interfacing Circuits

Data Communication and Networking

Resource Constrained AI

Specialization Project 0-0-12

8

VLSI Systems
(EE and CS)

In the current era of Internet-of-Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 5G

Circuits, there are multiple prototypes being proposed and demonstrated these
days for smart and real-time applications. To support this, high-speed
circuits/systems are required which should be able to handle high bandwidth
requirements of these applications. Over the decades, Very Large Scale

Integration (VLSI) technologies have been a robust way to implement the
required functionality through digital systems implementation and make it very
easy for the designers at different abstraction levels to transfer the intellectual
properties. For meeting timing and power requirements in these systems,
various aspects of application-specific integrated implementation of digital and
analog circuits/systems is required.

This program aims to provide the students an exposure by making them
understand the functioning, designing and testing of VLSI Circuits and System
as well as their performance assessment criteria. PG Programmes which are M.Tech thus The program includes a variety
of detailed courses on Analog Circuits, Digital Circuits, Mixed-Signal Circuits,

Synthesis, Verification and Testing. These courses address state-of-the art
design methodologies as well as current trends in the industry such as highspeed design issues and techniques.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

19

Hardware Design for Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0

Formal Verification 2-0-0

Advanced VLSI Design and Lab 2-0-

2

Digital and SoC Design

Fundamentals of Signal and Power

Integrity

Image Sensor Design and Applications

Neuromorphic Computing and Design

VLSI Broadband Communication

Circuits

VLSI Testing

Hardware Software Co-Design

Specialization Project 0-0-12

9

Smart Grid

Society’s ability to utilize more renewable energy like wind and solar power is
limited by the fact that our existing energy architecture was designed a century
ago. The current system relies on large, centrally controlled power plants with
predictable outputs. But wind and solar power fluctuates with environmental
conditions, are difficult to control, and the power they generate requires
conversion. Adapting the existing grid to operate reliably with renewable
energy sources is a complex task. A new architecture for power distribution,
called the smart grid, is required to accommodate renewable energy.

New technologies can have transformative impacts on remote communities that
are not served by traditional power grids. Power distribution challenges are
faced all over the world and the students should have an opportunity to receive
training in advances in smart grid technology.

Specialization Core
(8 credits)

Specialization Elective
(12 Credits)

Introduction to Smart Grid 3-0-0

Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0

Power Quality 2-0-0

Power System Protection 3-0-0

Power System Dynamics and

Control 3-0-0

HVDC & FACTS 3-0-0

Power Systems Restructuring 3-

0-0

Power Quality Mitigation

Techniques 3-0-0

Plugin Electric Vehicles 3-0-2

Power System Reliability and

Security 3-0-0

Selected Topics in Distributed

Generation 3-0-0

Introduction to Cyber-Physical

Systems 3-0-0Specialization

Project 0-0-6

20

12. Curriculum of B.Tech. inElectrical Engineering (Regular)

Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP C

I Semester II Semester

IE Introduction to

Electrical Engineering

3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering

Mechanics

2-1-0 3 - 3

IE Introduction to Computer Science

3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry 3-0-0 3 - 3

IE Introduction to

Bioengineering

3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3

IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1

IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1

IS Mathematics I 3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4

IE Engineering

Visualization

0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering

Realization

0-0-2 1 - 1

NE Engineering Design

I

0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering

Design II

0-0-2 2 1 -

NH Communication

Skill I

0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication

Skill II

0-0-2 2 1 -

NH Social Connect and
responsibilities I

0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect
and
responsibilities

II

0-0-1 1 0.

5
-

NH Performing Arts I
/Sports I

0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts

II/Sports II

0-0-1 1 0.

5
-

Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 Total 11-2-12 2

5

3 1

6

III Semester IV Semester

IE Materials Science &

Engineering

Fractal 1 – Energy

Materials

Fractal 2 –

Magnetic Materials

F3 – Computational

Material Design

3 ×

1-0-0

3 - 3 IE Pattern

Recognition and

Machine Learning in PG Programmes which are M.Tech

3-0-2 5 - 4

IE Signals and

Systems

3-1-0 4 - 4

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Circuit Theory 3-0-0 3 - 3

LS

Probability,

Statistics and

Stochastic

Processes

3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Engineering

Electromagnetic
s

3-0-0 3 - 3

LS Foundations of

Quantum

Information

Processing

3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Design 2-0-2 4 3

21

PC Data Structure and

Algorithms

3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Physical

Electronics

3-0-0 3 3

NE Intro. To Profession 0-0-2 2 1 IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3

Total 18-3-4 25 1 22 Total 17-0-4 2

1
- 1

9

V Semester VI Semester

PC Analog Circuits 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 PC Power

Engineering

3-0-3 6 - 4.

5

PC Electrical Machines 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Signal

Processing

2-0-0 3 - 2

PC Communication

Systems

3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Data

Communication

Networks

3-0-0 3 - 3

PC Computer

Architecture

3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Embedded

Systems

3-0-0 3 - 3

PC Control Systems 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 PC Communication

Systems Lab

0-0-3 3 - 1.

5

PC Digital Systems

Lab

0-0-3 3 - 1.

5

PC Electrical

Machines Lab

0-0-3 3 - 1.

5

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Program/Open

Elective

3-0-0 3 3

NH Professional Ethics

I

0-1-0 1 - NH Professional

Ethics II

0-0-2 2 1 -

Total 18-1-6 24 1 21 Total 15-0-14 2

9

1 2

1

VII Semester VIII Semester

PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3

PE
/

OE

Programme/Open

Electives
- - - 9 PE
/

OE

Programme/Op
en Electives
- - - 1

4

IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3

IS Environmental

Science

2-0-0 2 - 2

Total 15-0-6 - - 17 Total 17-0-0 - - 1

7

Total of Graded Credit - 1

5

0

Total of Non-Graded Credit 9 -

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 -

Grand Total 165

22

14. Detailed Program Compulsory Course Contents

Title Physical Electronics Number EEL2XXX

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]

Offered for B.Tech. EE Type Compulsory

Prerequisite Quantum Mechanics

Objectives

The Instructor will:

1. Provide background knowledge of basic semiconductor and semiconductor component physics and to use
relevant theoretical models for calculating properties and performance of semiconductor materials and
components.

2. Make students familiar with handling characterization of semiconductor components and circuits.

Learning Outcomes

The students are expected to have the ability to:

1. Describe the crystal structure and electronic band structure of the most common semiconductor materials,
along with calculation of properties of semiconductors and charge transport.

2. Explain the physics of p-n junction, the function and transport characteristics of the p-n diode, the bipolar
transistor and the MOSFET transistor

3. Describe metal-semiconductor junctions and semiconductor hetereojunctions and their application in
electronic components

Contents

Foundation [8 Lectures]:

Crystal structure, Review of quantum mechanics (3 L);

Electrons in periodic lattices, E-k diagrams, Electrons, holes and phonons. Effective mass, intrinsic & extrinsic
semiconductors, free carrier and carrier concentration and Fermi-level (5 L).

Charge Transport [4 Lectures]: Scattering and Drift, Mobility, Hall Effect, excess carriers. Surface recombination,
electrostatic field and built-in electric field.

PN junction [7 Lectures]:

Electrostatics, equilibrium and depletion approximation. Reverse bias transition capacitance, breakdown in PN
junctions (4L)

PN junction under forward bias, minority carrier injection, DC current-voltage characteristics, Temperature
effect (3L)

Non-ideal diodes [5 Lectures]:Tunneling diodes, AC Analysis, charge storage and transient characteristics;

Schottky barrier diodes,Ohmic contacts, Heterojunctions.

Bipolar transistors [8 Lectures]:

Derivation of I-V and current gain expressions, Equivalent circuits, Frequency response. (4 L);
pnpn structures, Silicon controlled rectifier, thyristor, Gate turn-off thyristor, Insulated-Gate bipolar transistor
(4 L).

MOS Structure and Transistors [10 Lectures]:

MOS capacitors, Flatband and threshold voltages (3 L);

Static MOS transistor, I-V Characteristics, MOS transistor equivalent circuit, cutoff frequency (4 L);

Body effect, Short Channel Devices, basic CMOS fabrication (3 L)

Textbook

1. Neamen, D. Biswas, D., (2017), Semiconductor Physics and Devices, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill

2. Streetman, B. G., Banerjee S. K., (2015), Solid State Electronic Devices, 7th Edition, Pearson Education India

Self Learning Material

1. Solid State Devices, NPTEL Course, Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute
of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106091/

23

Title Circuit Theory Number EEL2XX0

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]

Offered for B.Tech. EE Type Foundation course

Prerequisite Signals and Systems

Objectives

The Instructor will :

1. Teach the fundamentals of circuit elements and analyses.

2. Teach the time and frequency domain analyses of circuits.

3. Discuss the stability of a network.

Learning Outcomes

The students are expected to have the ability to:

1. Solve different electric circuit problems in time and frequency domain.

2. Analyze various two port networks and their stabilities.

Contents

Review of fundamental circuit elements, sources, and theorems [4 Lectures]: Properties of resistor, capacitor, inductor,
and various sources. Discussion and problem solving on KVL, KCL, maximum power transfer theorem,
compensation theorem, Thevenin and Norton theorems, Millman's theorem, Miller effect, Tellegen's theorem,
graph theory approach of circuit analysis.

Three phase systems [4 Lectures]:Three phase voltage and current, star-delta connections, line-to-line and phase
quantities, balanced and unbalanced circuits and power measurements.

Two port network analysis and synthesis [6 Lectures]:

Representation of two port networks in terms of impedance (Z) and admittance (Y) parameters, Transmission
(ABCD) parameters, Hybrid (h) parameters, g-parameters, Scattering (S) parameters and their suitable
applications (4L)

Idea of reciprocal and symmetric networks. Equivalent network parameters of series and parallel connections
of networks (2L)

Analyses and synthesis of R-L-C networks [8 Lectures]:

Analyses of R-L, L-C, R-C circuits under DC and AC excitations. Finding out initial conditions and the solution
of differential equations associated with RLC circuits in time domain (4L)

Network functions, Foster and Cauer synthesis, Helmholtz delay concept. (2L)

Series and parallel resonances, Q-factors, selectivity (2L)

Frequency domain analyses [8 Lectures]:

Idea of complex frequency and s-domain. Time domain to frequency domain transformation (4L)

Applications of Laplace and Fourier transforms in electric circuits. Poles and zeros of a network, Bode plot,
stability analyses (4L)

Filter synthesis [6 Lectures]:

Filter definitions and specifications, basic L-C filter, lattice structure (2L)
m-derived filter, Butterworth and Chebyshev filters, active filter(4L)

N.B. A total of six more class sessions will be included to solve numerical problems.

Textbook

1.V. Valkenberg, (2007), "Network Analysis," Prentice Hall International Edition

2.D. Chattopadhyay and P.C. Rakshit, (2000), "Fundamentals of Electric Circuit Theory," S. Chand & Company

3.C.K. Alexander and M.N.O. Sadiku, (2003) "Fundamentals of Electric Circuits," McGraw Hill.

4.E. A. Guillemin, (1953) "Introductory Circuit Theory," John Wiley and Sons

Self Learning Material

1.MIT open course on "Circuits and Electronics," https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-andcomputer-science/6-002-circuits-and-electronics-spring-2007/.

24

Title Engineering Electromagnetics Number EEL2XXX

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]

Offered for B.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory

Prerequisite Electromagnetism and Optics

Objectives

The Instructor will:

1. Familiarize behavior of Electromagnetic wave propagation in different medium and its application to solving
practical electromagnetic fields problems

2.Provide basic understanding about transmission line and radiating systems for solving engineering
electromagnetic problems

3.Provide basic understanding of wave propagation used in practical wireless propagation systems.

Learning Outcomes

The students are expected to have the ability to:

1. Formulate and analyse problems involving lossy media with planar boundaries using uniform plane
waves.

2. Solve engineering problems involving transmission lines, metallic/dielectric waveguides.

3. Obtain basic understanding of different radiating systems and be able to use these in the design of
rudimentary wireless communications systems

Contents

Review of Maxwell’s equations [4 Lectures]: Review of Maxwell’s Equation, time-harmonic fields, scalar and vector
potentials, boundary conditions, Uniform plane wave

Plane waves at boundaries [5 Lectures]:Plane wave reflection and refraction at boundaries: Normal and oblique
incidence, Brewster angle

Plane waves in dispersive media [5 Lectures]:quarter wave matching, wave propagation in dispersive media

Transmission Lines theory [5 Lectures]: Transmission line parameters and equations, Input impedance, standing
wave ratio and power

Transmission Lines application [5 Lectures]: Smith chart, Impedance matching, Applications of transmission lines,

Transient on transmission lines

Guided wave [5 Lectures]: TE, TM and TEM waves, parallel-plate waveguide

Waveguides [5 Lectures]: rectangular and cylindrical waveguides, waveguide resonators, dielectric guides

Antennas [8 Lectures]:

Hertzian dipole, half-wave dipole and quarter-wave monopole antennas, small loop antenna, antenna
characteristics and arrays(5L)

Wave propagation: Ground wave propagation, ionospheric propagation (3L)

Textbook

1.Hayt, W. H. & Buck, J. A.,(2015), Engineering Electromagnetics, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill

2.Sadiku, M. N. O., (2015), Principles of Electromagnetics, 6th edition, Oxford University Press

3.David K. Cheng, (1989), Fields and Waves Electromagnetics, 2nd edition, Pearson Education

Self Learning Material

1. Kumar P., Electromagnetic Theory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology

Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104087/#

Preparatory Course Material

Electromagnetics and Applications, Department of Electrical engineering and Computer Science,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT OpenCourseWare,https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electricalengineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-fall-2005/

25

Title Digital Design Number EELXXX0

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3]

Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory

Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering

Objectives

The Instructor will:

1. Provide the fundamental concepts in digital logic and system design.

2. Emphasize the modern design methodology to enable design practices using CAD tools.

Learning Outcomes

1.The students are expected to have the ability to Design and implement simple digital systems on FPGA
boards.

Contents

Digital Logic Families, Voltage levels, Noise Margin, Power Dissipation, Fan-In, Fan-Out, CMOS Logic [3 lectures]

Introduction to HDL, Design flow, Number representation, Arithmetic circuits: Fast Adders, Multipliers. [5 lectures]

Gate delays, Transient output.[2 lectures]

Multiplexers, Encoders, Decoders, Code Converters [5 lectures]

Design and Analysis of Synchronous circuits, Memory Element in HDL, Counters and Shift Registers.[5 lectures]

State Diagram, State Table, State Assignment and Reduction, Design of Finite State Machines (Melay and Moore),

Timing analysis [5 lectures]

Programmable Logic Devices: PLA, PAL, CPLD, FPGA. Implementation with FPGA. [3 lectures]

Lab Experiments on Designing Arithmetic circuits, Universal Shift Registers, Frequency Divide and Timing
circuits, ALU, UART, Serial Peripheral Interface, VGA, Control Applications: Vending Machine, Traffic Light

Controllers, Game Circuits, Motor Control.

Textbooks

1.Brown S. and Vranesic Z., (2013), Fundamentals of Digital Logic with Verilog Design, McGraw-Hill, 3rd

Edition.

2.Unsalan C., Tar B., (2017), Digital System Design with FPGA: Implementation Using Verilog and VHDL,

McGraw-Hill Education.

3.Mano M.M., Ciletti M.D., (2018), Digital Design: With an Introduction to the Verilog HDL, VHDL and

System Verilog, Pearson.

Self Learning Material

1.Roychoudhury, D., Digital Systems Design, Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian

Institute of Technology Kharagpur https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/105/117105080/

26

Title Analog Circuits Number

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5]

Offered for B. Tech Type Compulsory

Prerequisite

Objectives

The Instructor will:

1. Familiarize students with the concepts of analog circuits and give them a comprehensive overview of various
amplifiers.

2. Deliver the knowledge of analog circuits by focusing on design and implementation.

Learning Outcomes

The students are expected to have the ability to:

1. Implement the concepts of CMOS Analog Design on real world problems and applications.

2. Design various analog circuits like single stage, differential amplifiers, operational amplifiers, filters for
given specifications.

Contents

MOS Field-Effect Transistors: MOSFETs and its characteristics, operating modes [3 lectures]
single stage amplifier, small signal equivalent circuits [5 lectures]

Amplifier configurations [2 lectures]

Concept of biasing, cascode and cascade amplifiers, current mirrors [5 lectures]

Differential amplifiers: MOS differential pair, large and small signal analysis including common mode range
and output swing, common mode rejection, passive and active loads [5 lectures]

Frequency response of amplifiers: Fundamental concepts, High frequency model of transistors

Frequency compensation, Miller’s theorem [5 lectures]

Feedback: Negative feedback, Gain Desensitization, Bandwidth modification, Modification of I/O impedances,
sense and Return techniques, Stability in feedback systems [5 lectures]

Output Stages and Power Amplifiers: Basic stages, large signal considerations, class A, class B and class AB
configurations, low drop out regulators [5 lectures]

Operational Amplifiers: Op-Amp characteristics and specifications, concept of virtual ground [3 lectures]

Inverting and non-inverting amplifiers, op-amp applications including voltage summer, integrator,
differentiator, instrumentation amplifiers [4 lectures]

Lab Experiments: It will include design and analysis of various analog circuits like single-stage amplifiers [3
labs], differential amplifiers [2 labs], operational amplifiers and frequency compensation [3 labs], output
stages [2 labs] for given specifications and applications. Students will be introduced with different circuit and
design parameters like gain, bandwidth, ICMR, CMRR, PSRR, slew rate and others through DC, AC and
transient analysis using SPICE simulations. It will also include implementation & characterisation of discrete
off-the-shelf components using breadboard.

Textbook

1. Sedra, A. S., Smith, K. C., and Chandorkar, A. N., (2013), Microelectronic Circuits:

International Version, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press

2. Razavi, B., (2016), Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill Education.

3. Gray, P. R, Hurst, P. J., Lewis, S. H., and Meyer, R. G., (2020), Design of Analog Integrated Circuits: 5th

Edition, Wiley

Self Learning Material

1. Nagendra Krishnapura, Analog Integrated Circuit Design, Departme

Objectives

The Instructor will:

1. Introduce Linear Time Invariant System.

2. Teach design of linear feedback controller using time and frequency domain methods.

Learning Outcomes

The students are expected to have the ability to:

1. Analyze linear control system and to understand effect of feedback.

2. Design linear controllers.

Contents

Mathematical modeling of physical systems [8 Lectures]:

State variable and Transfer function representations; Examples of modeling different types (e. g. Electrical,
mechanical, chemical, biological, social etc.) systems [3L]

Duality between the elements of different types of systems. Linearity and linearization, Transfer function and
its interpretation in terms of impulse and frequency responses, Block-diagram and signal flow graph
manipulations [5L ]

Characterization of systems [7 Lectures]:

Time domain response for first order and second order systems; Damping ratio and natural frequency; Effect
of dominant poles and zeros on system response; Concept of system Stability, Routh array, [4L]

Frequency domain response of LTI system; peaking frequency, bandwidth; Link between time and frequency
domain response indices.[3L]

Analysis of Feedback [6 Lectures]:

Sensitivity and complementary sensitivity function, Disturbance and noise reduction, [3L]

Structured and unstructured plant uncertainties. Steady state errors and system types [3 Hours]

Analysis of closed loop systems[13 Lectures]:

Stabilityand relative stability [1L]

Root-locus approach [5 L]

Bode and Nyquist stability criterion [4L]

PID and Lag-Lead Controller Design[3 L]

State space modelling and state feedback control [8 Lectures]:

State space modelling, [2L]

Controllability and observability, [2L]

State feedback and observer design [4L]

Laboratory Classes (10-12 Classes)

A few experiments will be conducted on simulation of different systems i.e. temperature control, power
converter control using MATLAB as a tool. Experiments on servo position control, inverted pendulum,
helicopter emulator system, Active suspension, Magnetic Levitation, coupled tank system.

Textbooks

1. Franklin, G. F. , Powell, J. D., and Emami-Naeini, A. E.,(2002), Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems,

Prentice Hall Inc.

2. Nise, N., (2007), Control Systems Engineering, Wiley India

Traditional curriculum in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) has focused on two major areas, i.e., theory
and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of the era of Edge

Computing, Cloud Computing, Security, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed by the
incorporation of new emerging technologies. The discipline is becoming instrumental in solving major real-world
problems faced by modern society such as healthcare, security, sustainability, and socio-economic challenges.

There is a need to revamp the B.Tech program in CSE so as to prepare students to tackle problems which are
fundamentally multidisciplinary in nature. This would improve IIT Jodhpur’s participation and contribution
towards providing solutions for global challenges. IIT Jodhpur can become a leading source of technology
solutions for self-reliant India.

2. Objectives of the Program

The objective of the B.Tech. program in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur is to equip
students to undertake careers involving challenges of working on real-world problems, while innovating with
their core competency in computer science. The curriculum gives due importance to the foundational aspects of
computer science, as well as develops in students the necessary engineering skills for addressing emerging
technological challenges. The program offers flexibility in choosing elective courses for widening the
understanding of emerging concepts and processes in different domains. Students can opt for specializations
which provide a coherent and increasingly sophisticated understanding so as to enable them to pursue preferred
career opportunities. The program will produce a well prepared and well-motivated workforce to undertake
careers in research and industry involving innovation, knowledge creation, engineering, and entrepreneurship.

3. Expected Graduate Attributes

After completing this program, a student will be able to develop an ability to:

1. Apply appropriate knowledge in Computer Science and Engineering to identify, formulate, analyze, and solve
complex engineering problems in order to reach substantive conclusions.

2. Self-learn and engage in use of advanced computing tools.

3. Develop sustainable computing solutions in broader economic, societal and environmental contexts.

4. Think critically, creatively and analytically as a computer scientist, whilst being able to work effectively,
independently and collaboratively as part of a team in research, technology development and entrepreneurial
ventures.

5. Apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.

6. Effectively communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms.

7. Be motivated to engage in independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of evolving technological
challenges.

4. Learning Outcomes

The student will have the ability to:

1. Abstract out computational models based on mathematical rigor.

2. Critically analyse and appreciate emerging and applied fields of computer science owing to deeper
understanding and strong foundations in theoretical computer science.

3. Develop robust, secure, and efficient software systems that would involve software engineering, data
structures, and algorithm design paradigms.

4. Apply different concepts including digital design, computer architecture, operating systems, databases,
networking, and applications for building solutions for real-world problems.

5. Design and implement smart, intelligent, and user friendly interfaces for computer applications.

6. Analyse, design, develop and deploy computer based systems in collaboration with domain experts for
meeting societal needs in areas such as healthcare, safety, environment, law enforcement, transportation, etc.,
by exploiting tools and techniques of Big data, AI and project management.

7. Become proficient in some of the specialized areas such as Computer Vision, Augmented Reality, Internet of

Things, Natural Language Understanding, and Intelligent Communication.

2

8. Communicate effectively by comprehending, documenting, making effective presentations and exchanging
clear instructions.

5. New Skill Sets Targeted

1. Designing user-centric human-machine interfaces

2. Designing end-to-end socio-digital reality systems

3. Developing sustainable computing solutions

4. Building secure, intelligent, and trustable systems

5. Designing and synthesizing digital systems for solving industrial problems

6. Topic Clouds and Mapping of Topic Clouds with Proposed Courses

Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses

Area Topics Category
(Core/

Techniques

Technology/

Systems)

Course (IE/IS/

PC/PE)

Theory
and

Algorithms

Computing Paradigms, Syntax, Semantics Specification,

Attribute Grammar, Imperative Programming, Procedures,

Modules, Object-oriented Programming, Abstraction,

Encapsulation, Reuse, Functional Programming, Polymorphic

Data Types, Recursion, Lambda Calculus, Logic Programming,

Horn Clauses, Backtracking, Concurrent Programming,

Synchronization, Multithreads

Core Principles of

Programming

Languages
(PC)

Abstract Data Types, Linear Data Structures, Non Linear Data

Structures, Stack, Queue, Link List, Heap, Sorting, Hashing,

Algorithm Analysis, Graph, Tree

Core Data

Structures and

Algorithms
(PC)

Complexity Analysis, Divide-and-conquer, Greedy

Algorithms, Dynamic Programming, Linear Programming,

Universal Hashing, Approximation Algorithms, Randomized

Algorithms

Core Design and

Analysis of

Algorithms
(PC)

Discrete Structures, Logics, Set, Graph and Trees, Deterministic

Finite Automata, Non-deterministic Finite Automata,

PushDown Automata, Context Free Grammar, Turing

Machine, Lexical and Syntax Analysis, Parsing

Core Maths for

Computing
(PC)

Computability, Decision Trees and Communication

Complexity, Time Complexity, Space Complexity, Complexity
of Counting and Randomization

Core Theory of

Computation
(PE)

Graph algorithms, Directed and Undirected graph, Planar
graph, Graph coloring, Hamiltonion and Eulorian graph,

Bipartite graphs, Trees.

Core Graph

Theoretic

Algorithms
(PC Bouquet)

NP-Hard problems, Bounded Search Tree, Iterative

Compression, Randomized Methods, Kernelization, Sunflower

Lemma, Crown Decomposition, Expansion Lemma,

Intractability

Core Parameterized

Complexity
(PC Bouquet)

3

Persistence DS, Retroactive DS, Geometric DS, DS for Moving

Data, Dynamic Optimality, Cache-oblivious DS, van Emde

Boas, Sketching, String DS, Low Memory DS, Dynamic Graphs

Core and

Techniques

Advanced

Data

Structures (PE)

Euclidean TSP, Metric TSP, FPTAS, PTAS, Primal-Dual

Schema, Dual Fitting, Embeddings, Sparsest Cut, Random

Hyperplanes, Hashing, Makespan

Techniques Approximatio
n Algorithms
(PE)

Randomized Complexity Classes, Probabilistic Analysis,

Markov Chain, Random Walk, Randomized Graph

Algorithms, Randomized Sorting and Searching, Markov,

Chebyshev, Chernoff

Techniques Randomized

Algorithms
(PE)

Computational Model and Complexity Classes, NP, NP

Completeness, Complexity Issues in Cryptography, Lower

Bounds, Algebraic Computational Model, Levin’s Theory,

Hardness Amplification, Logic in complexity theory, Circuit

Lower Bounds

Core Complexity

Theory (PE)

Complex Numbers, Complex Vector Spaces, Quantum

Algorithms, Quantum Programming Languages, Quantum

Cryptography, Quantum Information Theory, Deutsch’s

Algorithm, Simon’s Periodicity Algorithm, Grover’s Search

Algorithm, The Deutsch–Jozsa Algorithm, Shor’s Factoring

Algorithm, Quantum Assembly Programming, Quantum Key

Exchange, Quantum Teleportation, von Neumann Entropy

Core Quantum

Computing
(PE)

Streaming Algorithms, Stream mining using Clustering,

Massive Data Clustering, Data Stream Classification,

Distributed Mining of Streaming Data, Change Diagnosis,

Forecasting on Stream, Dimensionality Reduction for

Streaming data.

Core and

Technique

Stream

Analytics (PE)

Hardware Introduction to HDL, Design flow, Number representation,

Arithmetic circuits, Design and Analysis of Synchronous
circuits, Design of Finite State Machines, CMOS Technology,

Programmable Logic Devices, CAD

Core Digital Design
(PC)

CPU, Memory, Processor, Instruction set Architecture, I/O,

ALU, Bus Architecture, Cache management, Performance

Core Computer

Architecture
(PC)

Embedded system design, Architectures of embedded
processors, Hardware-Software Co-design, ARM Cortex M3,

Programming for Embedded Systems, Real time OS,

Distributed Embedded Architectures, Real time scheduling
algorithms, Multi-rate systems

Systems Embedded

Systems (PC

Bouquet)

VLSI design flow, hardware modelling principles, hardware
description, Behavioural synthesis, logic optimization and
synthesis, Chip architectures, standard cells and FPGA,

Synthesis tools, layout synthesis

Technique High-level

Synthesis (PE)

4

Systems Processes Management, Process Coordination, Deadlock,

Memory Management, Storage Management, Protection and

Security

Core Operating

Systems (PC)

Database Architectures, Data Granularity, ER Model, EER

Model, Relational Model, Relational Algebra, Relational

Calculus, SQL, Schema, Query, Data Definition, Data

Manipulation, Data Retrieval, Views, Normalization,

Functional Dependency, Transactions, Schedules, ACID

Properties, Concurrency Control, Recoverability,

Serializability, Deadlock Prevention, Locking Protocols,

Timestamp Protocols, Deadlock Detection, Recovery Protocols,

Query Optimization, Hashing, Indexing

Core Database

Systems (PC)

Software Development Life Cycle, Software Engineering

Process Model, Software Design, UML, Design Pattern, Project

Management, Cost Analysis, UI Design, Service Oriented

Architecture, Software Quality, Risk Analysis, Agile

Methodologies, Software Architecture

Core Software

Engineering
(PC)

Software Testing, Quality Engineering, Testing Process,

Automatic Testing, Unit Testing, Defect Prevention, Process

Improvement, Quantifiable Quality Improvement, Quality

Model and Measurements, Defect Classification, Reliability

Engineering

Techniques Software

Testing and

Quality

Assurance (PE)

Distributed Systems, Centralized Systems, Data Transparency,

Data Fragmentation, Data Allocation, Security, Semantic

Integrity, Query Decomposition, Query Localization, Query

Ordering, Query Optimization, Transaction Management,

Concurrency Control, Deadlock Management, Reliability,

Recovery Protocols

Systems Distributed

Database

Systems (PE)

Fog Computing, Internet of Things and Analytics, Edge

Computing, Distributed computing and system design,
architecture, contemporary cloud framework, distributed data
& processing management, middleware design issues and
challenges, Edge & Fog for AI-driven applications

Systems Edge and Fog

Computing
(PE)

Concurrency, events & ordering, distributed file systems,
distributed disk management, fault tolerance, microkernel,
operating system kernel

Systems Distributed

Systems (PE)

Understanding Software & Evolution, Software Maintenance,

Software Reuse, Reverse engineering levels & techniques

Systems Software

Maintenance
(PE)

Network
and

Security

Cyber Security Vulnerabilities and Cyber Security Safeguards,

Securing Web Application, Services and Servers, Intrusion

Detection and Prevention, Firewalls, Cyberspace and the Law,

Cyber Forensics

Core Cyber Security
(PC)

OSI reference model, Packet switching techniques,

Performance metrics, Socket programming, Email, FTP, Telnet,

SSH, DNS, TCP, UDP, Transmission, Flow and Congestion

Control, Tunneling, Internet Protocol and its operation,

Routing algorithms, ICMP, ARP, RARP, DHCP, IPv6, RIP,

Core Computer

Networks (PC)

5

OSPF, Advanced Internetworking, Multicast routing, framing,
medium access mechanism, Public key and private key
cryptography, Firewalls, SDN Overview.

Overview about MANETs, VANETs, WSNs and WMNs,

Modulation techniques at PHY layer, Fading mitigation
techniques, MAC protocols for MANETs, Error correcting
codes, distributed wireless routing algorithms, transport level
mobility management, 5G overview, LPWAN, Bluetooth

Systems Introduction to

Wireless Ad
hoc Network
(PE)

Digital Trust, Digital Asset, Digital Transactions, Distributed

Ledger Technology, Digital Signature, Cryptocurrency,

Bitcoin, Hyperledger, Ethereum Interaction, Blockchain-as-aservice, Blockchain Use Cases, Blockchain Security

Technology Introduction to

Blockchain
(PE)

Cooperative Vehicular Safety Applications, Vehicular

Mobility Modeling, Physical Layer Considerations for

Vehicular Communications, MAC Layer of Vehicular

Communication Networks, VANET Routing protocols,

Emerging VANET Applications, Standards and Regulations

Systems Vehicular AdHoc Networks
(PE)

Overview of wireless systems, Multiplexing, Link adaptation,

Multihop routing protocols, Mobility and Handoff
management, Cellular Technologies, Overview of LTE and 5G

Cellular Networks, 5G Architecture, RAN and dynamic

CRAN, Mobility management and Network slicing in 5G,

Pervasive computing, Context aware sensor networks,

Localization, Android architecture and Overview, Body area
networks

Technology Mobile and

Pervasive

Computing
(PE)

4G LTE networks, From 4G to 5G, 5G overview, core,
signalling, 5G mobile edge and fog computing, application, 5G
vs mm-wave WiFi, India’s 5G policy and vision, 6G vision,
paper discussions

Technology 5G Mobile

Networks (PE)

Networking basics, switching architecture, SDN architectures,

OpenFlow, Network function virtualization, Emerging SDN
models, Data center networking

Core Software

Defined

Networks (PE)

Basic symmetric-key encryption, Message integrity, Public key
cryptography, Digital signatures ,Protocols

Core Cryptography
and Network
security (PE)

Applicatio
ns

Bayes Decision Theory, Regression, Bias variance, Maximum

Likelihood Estimation, Bayesian Parameter Estimation,

Decision Tree, Random Forest, Artificial Neural Network,

Clustering, k-means, SVM, Feature Selection, Dimensionality

Reduction

Core and

Technique

Pattern

Recognition
and Machine

Learning (PC)

Uninformed Search Strategies, Informed Search Strategies,

Local Search Algorithms, Hill Climbing, Constraint

Satisfaction Problems, Backtracking, Adversarial Search, MinMax algorithms, Propositional Logic, Reasoning Patterns,

First-order logic, Syntax, Semantics, Q-value, Policy,

Technique Artificial

Intelligence
(PE)

6

Search Engine Architecture, Retrieval Models, Performance

Evaluation, Text Categorization, Text Clustering, Web

Information Retrieval, Structured Document Retrieval

Techniques Information

Retrieval (PE)

Visual World, Geometry, Lights and Optics, Tracking,

Motion, Depth, Devices and tools

Technique Introduction to

AR and VR
(PE)

Geometric primitives, Clipping, Viewing, Rendering,

Animation, Shading, Coloring, OpenGL

Technique Computer

Graphics (PE)

Eye and early vision, Reasoning systems, Late vision, visual
attention, Cognitive architectures, Knowledge representation
and learning, Neural networks for vision, Applications in
vision tasks

Technique Principles of

Biological

Vision and

Applications
(PE)

Image formation and transformations, Camera calibration,

Image restoration, Spatial and Wavelet-based processing,

Epipolar Geometry, SfM, Optical flow, Key-point detection,

Feature description and matching, Deep learning for vision,

Applications

Technique Computer

Vision (PE)

Data storage methods, data access methods, analysis,
representation, visualization, visual storytelling, Dashboard,

Infographics

Technique Data

Visualization
(PE)

Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Optimization,

Regularization, Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural Network,

Recurrent Neural Network, LSTM, Deep Generative Models,

Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Belief Network,

Deep Convolutional GAN, Variational Autoencoder,

Representation Learning, Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer

Learning, Distributed Representation, Domain Adaptation,

Neural Language Model, Adversarial Learning

Technique Deep Learning
(PE)

Kernel Machines, Variants of Support Vector Machines, PAC

Theory, Boosting, Graphical Models, Structural Predictions,

Deep Reinforcement Learning, Space Coding

Core and

Technique

Advanced

Machine

Learning (PE)

Decision-making, Utility Theory, Utility Functions, Decision

Networks, Sequential Decision Problems, Partially Observable

MDP, Game Theory, Reinforcement Learning, Generalization,

Policy Search, Hidden Markov Model, Kalman Filter,

Knowledge Representation, Ontological Engineering,

Situation Calculus, Semantic Networks, Description Logic,

Planning graphs, Partial-order Planning, Conditional

Planning, Continuous Planning, Multi-agent Planning,

Hierarchical Task Network Planning, Non-deterministic

Domains

Core Advanced

Artificial

Intelligence
(PE)

Neuromorphic Engineering, Neuroanatomy of human brain,

Neuron models, Plasticity rules, Learning rules, Spiking

Neural Networks (SNN), Nanodevices for Neuron

Implementation, Synaptic emulation, Electronic synapses,

Digital/Analog neuromorphic VLSI, Hardware
implementation of synaptic circuits, Synaptic programming

Technique Neuromorphic

Design and

Computing
(PE)

7

Accuracy-explainability tradeoff, Interpretability problem,

Predictability, Transparency, Traceability, Causality,

Reasoning, Attention and Saliency, Interpretable AI, Prediction

Consistency, Adversarial Robustness, Trustworthy AI,

Integrity, Reproducibility, Accountability, Bias-free AI, Ethics
in AI

Technique Dependable

Artificial

Intelligence
(PE)

Fuzzy Computing, Fuzzy Systems, Neural Computing, Genetic

Algorithms, Rough Sets, Knowledge Representations,

Fuzzification, Defuzzification, Swarm Intelligence, Hybrid

Models, Neuro-fuzzy systems, Rough-neural computing

Technique Soft

Computing

Techniques
(PE)

Biological Signals, Biomedical Imaging Modalities, ECG, NMR
spectroscopy, electron microscopy, MRI, and X-Ray Images,

Visualization, Reconstruction, Restoration, Clustering, Graph

Partitioning, Deep Learning for Bio-image

Technique Bio-image

Computing
(PE)

Biometric Devices, Biometric System Design, Biometric Data

Analysis, Face Recognition, Fingerprint Matching, Signature

Authentication, Biometric

Technique Advanced

Biometrics
(PE)

Computational complexity of AI models, Prediction accuracy,

Numeric accuracy, Precision, Memory footprints, Edge AI,

Memory Optimization of Models, Hardware accelerators for

Edge AI, Vision Processing Unit, Streaming Hybrid

Architecture Vector Engine, Open Neural Network Exchange

Systems and

Technique

ResourceConstrained

Artificial

Intelligence
(PE)

Word representation, NLP tasks, Seq2Seq model, Question

Answering, Sentiment Analysis, Dialogue system, Machine

Translation, natural language generation Interpretability,

Knowledge Graphs.

Technique Natural

Language

Understanding
(PE)

Spoken language technology, dialog and conversational
systems, automatic speech recognition, speech synthesis, affect
detection, dialogue management.

Techniques Speech

Understanding
(PE)

Graphs, Network Models, Network Data Generation,

Structural Properties, Link Prediction, Community Detection,

Information Cascade, Small World Phenomenon, Homophily,

Structural Balance, Components, Network Evolution, Multilayer network

Technique Social

Networks (PE)

8

7. Course Categories, Credit Distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes

Table 2. Proposed Course Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes

S.N
.

Course Type Course Category Regular B.Tech. Double

B.Tech.

Credit Total Credit Total

1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59

Science (IS) 16 16

Humanities (IH) 12 9

2 Programme Linked
(L)

Science (LS) 7 0

3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 51 71 51 71

Programme Electives (PE) 17 17

B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0

5 Engineering Science
(E)

Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 22 22

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8 8

Total Graded 150 160

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15

Engineering (NE) 3 3

Design/Practical Experience (ND) 6 6

Total Graded + Non-Graded 165 175

9

8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes

Table 3. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up 6000 Level)

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact
hours

Total Credits
(TC=TH/3)

Contact Hours
(CH)

Beyond Contact

Hours (BCH)

Total Hours
(TH)

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1

1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5
#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.

10

9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses

Table 4. Programme Compulsory Courses

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit

1 Data Structure and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4

2 Maths for Computing 3-1-0 4 4

3 Digital Design 2-0-2 4 3

4 Human-Machine Interaction 0-0-4 4 2

5 Software Engineering 3-0-2 5 4

6 Operating Systems 3-0-2 5 4

7 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3-1-0 4 4

8 Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 3

9 Database Systems 3-0-2 5 4

10 Cyber Security 3-0-2 5 4

11 Computer Networks 3-0-3 5 4.5

12 Digital Systems LAB 0-0-3 3 1.5

13 Principles of Programming Languages 3-0-0 3 3

14a Randomized Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3

14b Approximation Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3

14c Distributed Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3

14d Optimization (B1) 3-0-2 5 4

15a VLSI Design (B2) 3-0-0 3 3

15b High-Level Synthesis (B2) 3-0-0 3 3

15c Embedded Systems (B2) 3-0-0 3 3

Total 51/52

11

10. Area-wise Programme Elective Courses

Table 5. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses

S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P

1 Theory and

Algorithms

1. Randomized Algorithms (700)

2. Approximation Algorithms (700)

3. Complexity Theory (400)

4. Advanced Data Structures (400)

5. Quantum Computing (400)

6. Graph-theoretic Algorithms (700)

7. Parameterized Complexity (700)

8. Optimization (Math) (400)

3-0-0

2 Hardware 1. High-level Synthesis (EE/CS)(700)

2. Embedded Systems (EE)

3. VLSI Design (EE)

4. Hardware Software Co-Design (CS) (700)

3-0-0

3 Systems 1. Software Testing and Quality Assurance (700)

2. Distributed Database Systems (700)

3. Distributed Systems (2-0-0) (400)

4. Mobile and Pervasive Computing (700)

5. Virtualization and Cloud Computing (700)

6. Compiler Design (700)

7. Software Maintenance (400)

3-0-0

2-0-2

4 Network and

Security

1. Introduction to Wireless Ad hoc Network (700)

2. 5G Mobile Networks(CS)(700)

3. Software Defined Networks (CS)(700)

4. Intelligent Radio Networks (EE) (700)

5. Data Communication Networks (EE) (300)

6. Cryptography and Network Security (CS/EE) (400)

7. Introduction to Blockchain (700)

3-0-0

2-0-0

3-0-2

5 AI-ML 1. Deep Learning (400)

2. Artificial Intelligence (400)

3. Advanced Machine Learning

4. Dependable Artificial Intelligence (400)

5. Information Retrieval (700)

6. Autonomous Systems (IDRP) (400)

7. Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulation in AI (700)

8. Planning and Decision making for Robots
(IDRP)(700)

3-0-0

6 Speech,Text,
and Vision

1. Natural Language Understanding (700)

2. Digital Image Processing (400)

3. Computer Vision (400)

4. Computer Graphics (400)

5. Speech Understanding (700)

3-0-0

12

7 Social

Computing

1. Social Computing

2. Sustainable Computing

3. ICT for Development

4. Machine Learning for Epidemiology

5. Health Informatics

6. Computational Social Choice

7. Computational Cognition & Behavior Modelling

8. Social Networks

9. Ethics, policy, law and regulations in AI

10. Crowd-sourcing and human computing

11. Environmental Informatics

12. Computational Microeconomics

3-0-0

3-0-0

2-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

0-0-2

3-0-0

3-0-0

3-0-0

13

11. Specializations Offered by the Department

Table 6. Specializations and courses

S. No. Name of

Specialization

Specialization Core (8

Credits) Specialization Elective (12 Credits)

1. Visual Computing
(CSE, AIDE, EE) Jointly with EE and AIDE Jointly with EE and AIDE

2. Socio-Digital Reality
(CS, AIDE, EE) Jointly with EE and AIDE Jointly with EE and AIDE

3. Advanced

Algorithms

Advanced Data Structures
(3-0-0), Complexity Theory
(3-0-0), Algorithms for Big

Data (from M.Tech, 2-0-0)

Randomized Algorithms, Approximation

Algorithms, Theory of Computation,

Distributed Algorithms, Quantum

Computing (IDRP), Optimization, Graph

Theory and Applications, Parameterized

Complexity

4.

Social and

Sustainable

Computing

Social Computing (3-0-0),

Sustainable Computing (3-

0-0),

ICT for Development (2-0-

0)

Machine Learning for Epidemiology (3-0-

0), Health Informatics (3-0-0),

Computational Social Choice (3-0-0),

Computational Cognition & Behavior

Modelling (3-0-0), Social Networks (3-0-0),

Ethics, Policy, Law and regulations in

AI(0-0-2), Crowd-sourcing and human
computing (3-0-0), Environmental

Informatics (3-0-0), Computational

Microeconomics (3-0-0), Project (0-0-6)

This BTech program combines two broad areas, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, while building a
strong foundation in Computer Science. Artificial Intelligence (AI) aims to create machines to act with higher
levels of intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. On the other hand,

Data Science (DS) is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing data pertaining
to a system or a process. AI and Data Science can feed into each other as evolutionary systems that can
continuously learn from data and thereby emulate humans better. As the demand for these areas increases,
there is also an increasing need for building the future workforce for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science.

IIT Jodhpur will offer this unique program to develop the Artificial Intelligence and Data Science ecosystem in
the country. The curriculum includes courses in computer science, mathematics, artificial intelligence,
machine learning, and their applications in various domains. The curriculum also provides opportunities to
the students to explore specialization areas including visual computing, socio-digital realities, robotics, and

AIOT. The program also allows the students to venture into Management specialization with AI and

Technology focus, leading to MBA (BTech + MBA dual degree program), as well as entrepreneurial activities.

The program also enables the students to build strong industry linkages in terms of practical training program,
summerinternships, and co-supervision on projects.

2. Objectives of the program

1. BTech in AI&DS will offer students with in-depth knowledge of fundamental concepts, as well as
application- oriented technologies in the broad areas of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science.

2. A student completing this program will be capable of undertaking careers in industry as well as
academia. Interested students may also follow entrepreneurial endeavors in AI&DS areas.

3. He/She will have the option to explore a variety of domains including governance, finance, security,
transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture/food processing, population studies, legal
systems, content creation and management systems, weather prediction, economics, predictive
maintenance, smart manufacturing, education, human and robot interaction/intelligent automation,
smart city, drug discovery, and aid for differently abled/accessibility technology.

3. Expected Graduate Attributes

After completing this program, a student will develop an ability to:

1. Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AI&DS
methodologies.

2. Skill set to clean, process, analyze, manage and handle security and privacy aspects of structured and
unstructured data.

3. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining methods for
generating relevant insight from data.

4. Design and build real-world AI&DS systems, solving application-specific problems, and to reason about
them.

5. Conceive, design and develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine interfaces.

6. Design, develop, and deploy machine learning based applications using structured and unstructured data
(e.g., speech, text, images/videos).

7. Capability to follow a unique interdisciplinary approach for solving problems, using knowledge of
mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among physics, chemistry, biology,
engineering sciences, and management.

8. Understand and assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AI&DS based systems and their
impact on societal and environmental context.

9. Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments.

10. Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.

11. Plan and manage technical projects.

4. Learning Outcomes

The student will have an ability to

1. Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals along with artificial intelligence
and machine learning knowledge, and an engineering specialization to develop solutions to real-world
problems.

2. Apply appropriate theories, design principles, frameworks, and protocols to develop AI & DS based
system prototypes.

2

3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of modern simulation, and AI & DS programming tools with an
understanding of the limitations.

4. Apply to reason informed by the contextual knowledge to assess societal, health, safety, legal and cultural
issues and the consequent responsibilities relevant to the professional engineering practice.

5. Function effectively as an individual, and as a member or leader in diverse teams, and in
multidisciplinary settings.

6. Communicate effectively on complex engineering activities by comprehending and writing effective
reports and design documentation, making effective presentations and exchanging clearinstructions.

7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real-worldproblems.

8. Recognize the need for, and have the preparation and ability to engage in independent and life-long
learning in the broadest context of technological change.

5. New skill sets targeted

1. AI&DS algorithms for transforming large data into actionable decision

2. Building end to end systems for enhancing human capabilities using vision, language, and textprocessing

3. Foundations in ML Optimization

4. Ethical, Safe, and Dependable AI/ML Systems

5. Familiarity with emerging and futuristic AI&DS techniques

6. Entrepreneurial capability

7. Written and oral communication

3

6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses

Map topics with courses in the table given below:

Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses

Area Topics Category
(Core/

Techniques

Technology/

Systems)

Course (IE/IS/PC/PE)

AI and ML

Abstract Data Types, Linear Data Structures, Non

Linear Data Structures, Stack, Queue, Link List, Heap,

Sorting, Hashing, Algorithm Analysis, Graph, Tree

Core Data Structures and

Algorithms (PC)

Discrete Structures, Logics, Set, Graph and Trees,

Deterministic Finite Automata, Non-deterministic Finite

Automata, PushDown Automata, Context Free

Grammar, Turing Machine, Lexical and Syntax

Analysis, Parsing

Core Maths for Computing (PC)

Hardware-Software interaction, Digital circuit design
and analysis, Computer system design, Instruction set
architecture, Language translation, Semantic analysis

Core Principles of Computer

Systems - 1 (PC)

Network-OS interaction, Process management, Storage
management,

Core Principles of Computer

Systems - 2 (PC)

Complexity Analysis, Divide-and-conquer, Greedy

Algorithms, Dynamic Programming, Linear

Programming, Universal Hashing, Max-flow Min-cut,

Amortized Analysis, Traveling Salesman Problem,

Approximation Algorithms

Core Design and Analysis of

Algorithms (PC)

Bayes Decision Theory, Regression, Bias variance,

Maximum Likelihood Estimation, Bayesian Parameter

Estimation, Decision Tree, Random Forest, Artificial

Neural Network, Clustering, k-means, SVM, Feature

Selection, Dimensionality Reduction

Core and

Technique

Pattern Recognition and

Machine Learning (IE)

Uninformed Search Strategies, Informed Search

Strategies, Local Search Algorithms, Hill Climbing,

Constraint Satisfaction Problems, Backtracking,

Adversarial Search, Min-Max algorithms, Propositional

Logic, Reasoning Patterns, First-order logic, Syntax,

Semantics, Q-value, Policy,

Technique Artificial Intelligence (PC)

Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Optimization,

Regularization, Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural

Network, Recurrent Neural Network, LSTM, Deep

Generative Models, Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN), Deep Belief Network, Deep Convolutional

GAN, Variational Autoencoder, Representation

Learning, Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer

Learning, Distributed Representation, Domain

Adaptation, Neural Language Model, Adversarial

Learning

Technique Deep Learning (PC)

Accuracy-explainabilitytradeoff, Interpretability
problem, Predictability, Transparency, Traceability,

Causality, Reasoning, Attention and Saliency,

Interpretable AI, Prediction Consistency, Adversarial

Robustness, Trustworthy AI, Integrity, Reproducibility,

Accountability, Bias-free AI, Verified AI, Federated

Learning, Differential Privacy,

Technique Dependable AI (PC)

4

Convexity, Linear programming, Duality, Integer
programming, Nonlinear programming, Lagrange
multipliers, First and second order conditions, Local
and global convergence, Gradient descent methods

Core and

Technique

Optimization for Machine

Learning (PC)

Decision-making, Utility Theory, Utility Functions,

Decision Networks, Sequential Decision Problems,

Partially Observable MDP, Game Theory,

Reinforcement Learning, Generalization, Policy Search,

Hidden Markov Model, Kalman Filter, Knowledge

Representation, Ontological Engineering, Situation

Calculus, Semantic Networks, Description Logic,

Planning graphs, Partial-order Planning, Conditional

Planning, Continuous Planning, Multi-agent Planning,

Hierarchical Task Network Planning, Non-deterministic

Domains

Core Advanced AI (PE)

Kernel Machines, Variants of Support Vector Machines,

PAC Theory, Boosting, Graphical Models, Structural

Predictions, Deep Reinforcement Learning, Sparse

Coding

Core and

Techniques

Advanced Machine

Learning (PE)

Computational complexity of AI models, Prediction
accuracy, Numeric accuracy, Precision, Memory
footprints, Edge AI, Memory Optimization of Models,

Hardware accelerators for Edge AI, Vision Processing

Unit, Streaming Hybrid Architecture Vector Engine,

Open Neural Network Exchange

Systems and

Technique

Resource-constrained

Artificial Intelligence (PE)

Search Engine Architecture, Retrieval Models,

Performance Evaluation, Text Categorization, Text

Clustering, Web Information Retrieval, Structured

Document Retrieval

Technique Information Retrieval (PE)

Graph algorithms, Directed and Undirected graph,

Planner graph, Graph coloring, Hamiltonion and

Eulorian graph, Bipartite graphs, Trees.

Core Graph Theoretic

Algorithms (PE)

Streaming Algorithms, Stream mining using Clustering,

Massive Data Clustering, Data Stream Classification,

Distributed Mining of Streaming Data, Change

Diagnosis, Forecasting on Stream, Dimensionality

Reduction for Streaming data.

Core and

Technique

Stream Analytics (PE)

HCI and

Social

Sensing

User experience, Prototyping techniques and
evaluation, Interface design and interaction,Speculative
design, Value sensitive design

Technique
and Systems

Human-Machine

Interaction (PC)

Visual World, Geometry, Lights and Optics, Tracking,

Motion, Depth, devices and tools

Technique Introduction to AR and

VR (PE)

Graphs, Network Models, Network Data Generation,

Structural Properties, Link Prediction, Community

Detection, Information Cascade, Small World

Phenomenon, Homophily, Structural Balance,

Components, NetworkX, Gephi, Network Evolution,

Multi-layer network

Technique Social Networks (PE)

Data and

Distributed

Sciences

Representing data, Data science ecosystem, data
sources, data storage, data model, Structured data,
unstructured data, semi-structured data, Accessing
data, SQL, NoSQL databases, parallel data reads/writes
for high throughput, distributed database, Analysing
data, distributed data processing

Techniques
and Systems

Data Engineering (PC)

Data Visualization, Data representation, feature
representations, encoded representations, Spatial data
representation, Time-series data representations,

Techniques
and Systems

Data Visualization (PC)

5
visualization of multivariate data, geometry,

Information illustration, Maps and Graphics, Advanced

Visualization, Interactive graphics, infographics,
visualization of high dimensional data

Multivariate analysis, Sampling theory, Matrix
decomposition, Algorithms for big matrices, Data
intensive processing

Techniques
and Systems

Maths for Big Data (PC)

Decision

Sciences
and

Cognition

Computational Neuroscience Models: Descriptive,

Mechanistic and Interpretive models, Synapse, Neural
encoding, Neural decoding, Neuron models, Spikes,

Modeling connections between neurons, Synaptic
plasticity and learning, Unsupervised and supervised
learning from the perspective of neurons

Computational

Neuroscience (PE)

Biological signals, Biomedical imaging modalities,

Sectioning, Multimodal images, Reconstruction, Image
segmentation, Object delineation, Classification, Image
registration, Deep Learning for Bio-imaging, Tracking,

Interactive image analysis

Bio-imaging (PE)

Application
s

Image digitization, Pixel relationships and distances,

Camera model and stereo imaging, Image transforms,

Image Enhancement: Spatial and Frequency domain,

Image Restoration, Image segmentation, Color image
processing, image morphology, Image compression and
coding, Image features

Technique Digital Image Processing
(PE)

Spoken language technology, dialog and conversational
systems, automatic speech recognition, speech
synthesis, affect detection, dialogue management.

Techniques Speech Understanding
(PE)

Image formation and transformations, Camera
calibration, Image restoration, Spatial and Waveletbased processing, Epipolar Geometry, SfM, Optical
flow, Key-point detection, Feature description and
matching, Deep learning for vision, Applications

Techniques Computer Vision (PE)

Geometric primitives, clipping, viewing, rendering,
animation, Shading, Coloring, OpenGL

Technique Computer Graphics (PE)

Word representation, NLP tasks, Seq2Seq model,

Question Answering, Sentiment Analysis, Dialogue
system, Machine Translation, natural language
generation, Interpretability, Knowledge Graphs

Applications Natural Language

Understanding (PE)

Biometric system design, Genesis of biometrics, System
architecture, Performance evaluation, Biometric
modalities, Biometric security, Biometric devices,

Biomedical applications

Applications Advanced Biometrics (PE)

Multi-dimensional signals, systems, transforms and
sampling; Camera models; Motion and shape
estimation; Video segmentation and tracking; Video
filtering, compression and restoring; Ego-centric, 360-
degree and Streaming video

Objectives

1. To introduce and implement various techniques for designing algorithms and advanced data
structures.

2. To learn space and time complexity analysis of algorithms.

Learning Outcomes

1. Ability to choose and implement appropriate algorithm design techniques for solving problems.

2. Understand how the choice of data structures and algorithm design methods impact the
performance of programs.

3. Ability to analyze the worst-case and average-case behaviour of algorithms in terms of time and
memory requirements.

Contents

Reasoning About Algorithms: P, NP, NP-completeness, Reductions, Complexity analysis. (5 lectures)

Graph Algorithms: Strongly-connected components, Kosaraju’s algorithm 1 and 2, Applications. (4
lectures) Greedy Techniques: Local versus Global optimality, Interval scheduling, Exchange
arguments. (5 lectures)

Divide-and-Conquer: Optimality, Recursive algorithms, Divide-and-Conquer recurrences, The Master

Theorem and applications, Non-uniform recurrences. (6 lectures)

Dynamic Programming: Reusing sub-computations (Sequence alignment, Bellman-Ford algorithm),

Precomputing (Floyd-Warshall algorithm, Johnson’s algorithm), Combinatorial problems. (Knapsack) (6
lectures)

Linear Programming: Canonical and standard forms, Feasibility and optimization, Simplex algorithm. (5
lectures)

Approximation Algorithms: Relative approximations, PAS and FPAS scheduling. (4 lectures)

Randomized Algorithms: Random guess (Quick select), Random guess with high confidence (Karger’s
min-cut algorithm), Storing associative data (Hashing), Error bounds. (7 lectures)

Text Book

T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009), Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 3rd

Edition.

Reference Book

J. KLEINBERG, E. TARDOS (2005), Algorithm Design, Pearson Education, 1st Edition.

To provide a theoretical and practical understanding of human-machine interaction (HMI) design,
including concepts of user centered and design thinking, usability, interfaces, rapid prototyping, and
evaluation.

Learning Outcomes

1. The students will have:

2. A broad understanding of human-machine interaction and latest technologies.

3. Understanding of the perceptual and cognitive basis of human-machine interaction.

4. Knowledge of user centered design and techniques for rapid prototyping.

5. Knowledge of assessing usefulness and usability of a design

6. Introduction to approaches for gathering and analyzing interaction data, and conveying design
concepts.

Lectures (discussions in the lab and web-based flip pedagogy)

1. Theories and Research Methods in HMI

2. Understanding User Experience

3. Foundations and Concepts of Interaction

4. Prototyping Techniques

5. Prototyping Evaluation

6. Communicating User Needs and Requirements

7. Speculative Design

8. Case Studies

Laboratory and Assignments (primary approach)

1. Find a poorly designed item (anything).

Submit either a picture or sketch and describe why it is poorly designed. (Week 1)

2. Heuristic Evaluation and Interview (Week 1)

3. User Scenarios, Personas and Storyboards ((Week 2)

4. User Journeys (Week 3)

5. Wireframes: Paper and Digital Prototyping (Week 4)

6. Prototype Evaluation Study Design (Week 5, 6)

7. Value Sensitive Design Evaluation (Week 7, 8)

8. Design visual Interfaces (laptop, mobile) - e.g. gesture based (Week 9, 10)

9. Design voice interfaces - e.g. speech chatbot (Week 11, 12)

10. Design multimodal interactions (Week 13, 14)

To learn about languages, grammars, and computation models

2. To learn about computability

3. To learn basics of parsing techniques

Learning Outcomes:

The students are expected to have the ability to:

1. Model computer science problems using discrete mathematical structures

2. Distinguish between computable and non-computable problems

3. Develop understanding of properties of languages and design parsers

Contents

Discrete Structures: Can computers solve every problem? The limits of computing, Set theory, Relations
and functions, Propositional logic, First-order logic, Counting techniques. (12

Lectures)

Proof techniques: Constructive, Contraposition, Contradiction, Mathematical Induction (5 Lectures)

Graph Theory: Properties of graphs, Graph matching and coloring. (6 Lectures)

Automata Theory: DFAs, NFAs, Equivalence of DFAs and NFAs, Closure properties of regular languages,

Regular expressions, Equivalence of regular expressions and NFAs, Nonregular languages, Context-Free

Grammars, Context-Free Languages. (10 Lectures)

Turing Machine: Introduction, Designing Turing machines, The Universal Turing machine. (5 Lectures)

Parsing Techniques: LR, LALR, Shift-Reduce parsers. (4 Lectures)

Text Books

M. SIPSER (2014), Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Cengage Learning, 3rd Edition.

K.H. ROSEN (2018), Discrete Mathematics and its Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2018, 8th Edition.

References

J.E. HOPCROFT, R. MOTWANI, J.D. ULLMAN (2008), Pearson, Introduction to Automata Theory,

Languages, and Computation, 3rd Edition.

R. JOHNSONBAUGH (2017), Discrete Mathematics, Prentice Hall, 8th Edition.

 To understand various key paradigms for pattern classification and machine learning approaches

2. To familiarize with the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition and
machine learning.

3. To understand and differentiate among various pattern recognition and machine learning
techniques.

Learning Outcomes

The students are expected to have the ability to:

1. To formulate a machine learning problem

2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analyzing data in a given feature space.

3. Apply pattern recognition and machine learning techniques such as classification and feature
selection to practical applications and detect patterns in the data.

Contents

Introduction: Definitions, Datasets for Pattern Recognition, Different Paradigms of Pattern Recognition
and

Machine Learning, Data Normalization, Hypothesis Evaluation, VC-Dimensions and Distribution, BiasVariance Tradeoff, Regression (Linear) (8 Lectures)

Discriminative Methods: Distance-based methods, Linear Discriminant Functions, Decision Tree, Random

Decision Forest and Boosting (5 Lectures)

Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule, Minimum error rate classification, Normal density and
discriminant functions, Bayesian networks (7 Lectures)

Parameter Estimation: Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter Estimation (3 Lectures)

Feature Selection and Dimensionality Reduction: PCA, LDA, ICA, SFFS, SBFS (4 Lectures)

Artificial Neural Networks: MLP, Backprop, and RBF-Net (4 Lectures)

Kernel Machines: Kernel Tricks, Support Vector Machines (primal and dual forms), K-SVR, K-PCA (6

Lectures)

Clustering: k-means clustering, Gaussian Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm (5 Lectures)

Laboratory

Programming labs on Normalization, Visualization, Evaluation, Regressions, Decision Tree,

Bayes, Parameter Estimation, PCA, LDA, ANN, SVM, K-means, GMM, Feature Selection

Text Book

1. R. O. DUDA, P. E. HART, D. G. STORK (2000), Pattern Classification, Wiley-Blackwell, 2nd Edition.

Reference Books

1. C. M. BISHOP (2006), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer-Verlag New York,

1st Edition.

2. T. M. MITCHELL (2017), Machine Learning, McGraw Hill Education, 1st Edition.

The Instructor will:

1. Explain necessary layered abstraction of a system

2. Provide an understanding of basic concepts of several hardware components and design of
computing components

3. Introduce language translation schemes

Learning Outcomes

The students will have the ability to:

1. Design combinational and sequential circuits for a set of problems

2. Explain the working principles of several components of a computer

3. Design algorithms for language translations.

Contents

Introduction: Layered architecture of a system, Hardware, Software, Hardware-software Interaction (2

Lectures)

Digital Circuit Design: Combinational Circuits, Combinational Analysis and Design, Sequential Circuits,

Sequential Analysis and Design (10 Lectures)

Computer System Design: Instruction set Architecture, CPU, Performance analysis, Pipelining, Memory

Hierarchy, I/O, ILP (10 Lectures)

Language Translation: Levels of language translation, Compiler, Semantic Analysis, Code generation (6

Lectures)

Laboratory

Digital Logic Circuits, Digital Hardware, VHDL state machines, Machine Language Design, Memory,

CPU, Assembler, Parallel Programming.

Recent advancement in computer graphics and sensor technologies have provided a complete
set of interactive tools that give us unprecedented possibilities to completely immerse humans
in virtual environments or augment real environments. Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented

Reality (AR) constitute a completely new computing paradigm finding its way into applications
for industry, health care, education, entertainment etc. Prime aim of this master’s programme
is to train professionals who can design, implement and evaluate VR and AR applications.

In order to meet this increasing demand of engineers with diverse backgrounds in the field of
augmented and virtual reality and to support relevant research and development, an M.Tech.
programme in AR and VR is designed. 

The proposed M.Tech. programme will provide
interdisciplinary learning opportunities to participate in one of the most challenging advanced
technology areas. It is also envisaged that this programme will serve as a platform to test
innovative ideas in the design, development, and testing of the AR and VR systems.

Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, Head Mounted Display, Visual Perception, Geometry
of Camera and Visual World, 3D Modeling, Manipulation and Interaction with objects,
Neural Networks, Light and Optics, haptic interfaces and haptic rendering, Mobile
VR/AR, Convolutional Neural Networks, Transfer Learning, Representation Learning,
Generative Models, Model Compression, Design Thinking Process, Context Modeling,

Ideation and Storyboarding, Prototyping, Evaluation of Interaction and Experience, User
Feedback

● Physiological basis of different senses and psychophysical methods for computing
perceptual thresholds
Advanced Topic Cloud

● Scanning, 3D Reconstruction, Surface Representation, Geometry Processing, Image
Synthesis for AR/VR, Ray Tracing, Image and Physics Based Rendering, Neural Image
Synthesis, Game Design, Hardware Design, Sensor Data Fusion, Tracking and
Navigation, Blender’s interface and Modeling in Blender, Texturing and Shading in
Blender, Viewing scene in VR in Blender, importing to Unity or Unreal Engine,
Introduction to the interface and Scene Setup, Creating a VR App.

Objectives
The Instructor will:

1. Provide the fundamentals of haptics, and its application to various domains.

2. Provide exposure to practical problems and their solutions in the field of haptics
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to

1. Develop haptic modeling and rendering algorithms for virtual objects using various
haptic interfaces.

2. Design psychophysical experiments for evaluation of the developed rendering
algorithms.

Contents

Human Haptics
Haptic Sensations- Kinesthetic and Tactile, Physiology of Human Touch, Overview of Haptic

Interfaces, Applications of Haptics (4 lectures)

Haptic Perception- Kinesthetic/Tactile, Multisensory Interactions, Psychophysics for Haptic

Perception: Psychometric Function, Perceptual Thresholds, Laws of Perception, Classical and

Modern Psychophysical Methods
(10 lectures)

Haptic Rendering
Basic Concepts and Steps of Haptic Rendering, Rendering Stability, Kinesthetic Rendering: 3
DoF Rendering, Haptic Volume Rendering; Texture/Tactile Rendering, Friction Rendering,
Measurement-based/Data-driven Haptic Rendering
(12 lectures)

Haptics for Telepresence and Tele-action (TPTA)
Overview of a TPTA system, Issues for Haptic Transmission, Kinesthetic Data Compression,
Tactile Data Compression, Haptics over Shared Network (8 lectures)

Emerging areas in Haptics
Surface Haptics- Electrostatic vs Ultrasonic; Mid-air Haptics, Haptic Interaction in Virtual and
Augmented Reality (VR/AR)

Objectives

The Instructor will:

1. Provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms related to
Machine Learning with specific focus on Deep Learning.

Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:

1. Design and program efficient algorithms related to recent machine learning techniques,
train models, conduct experiments, and develop real-world ML-based applications and
products

Contents

Fractal 1: Foundations of Deep Learning
Deep Networks: CNN, RNN, LSTM, Attention layers, Applications (8 lectures)

Techniques to improve deep networks: DNN Optimization, Regularization, AutoML (6 lectures

Fractal 2: Representation Learning

Representation Learning: Unsupervised pre-training, transfer learning, and domain adaptatio
distributed representation, discovering underlying causes (8 lectures)

Auto-DL: Neural architecture search, network compression, graph neural networks (6 lecture

Fractal 3: Generative Models

Probabilistic Generative Models: DBN, RBM (3 lectures)

Deep Generative Models: Encoder-Decoder, Variational Autoencoder, Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN),

Deep Convolutional GAN, Variants and Applications of GANs (11 lectures)

Textbook
1. Goodfellow,I., Bengio.,Y., and Courville,A., (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press

Gaurav Bhatnagar is a Professor in the Department of Mathematics at Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur since June 2023. 